Braj Bhum in
Mughal Times
 The State, Peasants and Gosa’ins




Irfan Habib and Tarapada Mukherjee
Bra/ Bhiim in Mughal Times: The State, Peasants and
Gosa ins represents a unique effort at presenting
the conditions of life of the ordinary people
in a small region of the Mughal Empire from
about the accession of Akbar (1556) to the
collapse of Mjughal power (1739). The study
brings out ho\v the Mughal administration
               !
functioned on the ground, how peasant
communities were organized and religious men
conducted th|ir worldly affairs. We are even
able to meet ^ome lowly men and women as
distinct individuals.

Some interesting facts also emerge: the early
dates from which Akbar’s grants to temples
began; the extensive survey of temples in Braj
heartland that Akbar ordered in 1598; and,
late in Aurangzeb’s reign (1704), the official
levy of Re. 1 per annum on each village in the
Braj region to be collected by the Chaitanya
—          Readers to whom ordinary people
matter should find much of interest in
the reconstructed history of three villages
separately studied (Vrindavan, Radhakund
and Rajpur). At the end, there are biographies
of Gosains of the Chaitanya sect mainly
containing details of their worldly concerns.

The book useis a mass of privately
preserved documents in Persian and Braj,
along with historical texts, travel accounts,
etc. (see Introduction). A bibliography and
comprehensive index will be found at the
end of the book.




                       ISBN: 978-93-89850-22-2
              i
   BRAJ BHUM
IN MUGHAL TIMES
             Braj Bhum
          in Mughal Times
      The State, Peasants and Gosa ins




               IRFAN HABIB
  PROFESSOR EMERITUS, ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY

                      and
(THE LATE) TARAPADA MUKHERJEE
 SCHOOL OF ORIENTAL AND AFRICAN STUDIES, LONDON
                                 PRIMUS BOOKS
                          An imprint ofRatna Sagar P Ltd.
                                   Virat Bhavan
                        Mukherjee Nagar Commercial Complex
                                   Delhi 110 009

                   Offices at CHENNAI LUCKNOW
AGRA AHMED ABAD BENGALURU BHOPAL COIMBATORE DEHRADUN GUWAHATI
 HYDERABAD JAIPUR JALANDHAR KANPUR KOCHI KOLKATA MUMBAI PATNA
                            RANCHI VARANASI

               © Irfan Habib and Heirs ofDr. Tarapada Mukherjee 2020

          All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
       stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
          without the prior permission in writing from Primus Books, or as
          expressly permitted by law, by licence, or under terms agreed with
                    the appropriate reproduction rights organization.
       Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should
                      be sent to Primus Books at rhe address above.

                                  Pirst published 2020

                         ISBN: 978-93-89850-22-2 (hardback)
                           ISBN: 978-93-89850-23-9 (POD)

                              Published by Primus Books

                        Lasertypeset by Sai Graphic Design
                   Arakashan Road, Paharganj, New Delhi 110 055

                Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd.




        ALIGARH HISTORIANS SOCIETY SERIES



 This book is meant for educational and learning purposes. The author(s) of the book
   has/have taken all reasonable care to ensure that the contents of the book do not
  violate any existing copyright or other intellectual property rights of any person in
   any manner whatsoever. In the event the author(s) has/have been unable to track
    any source and if any copyright has been inadvertently infringed, please notify
                      the publisher in writing for corrective action.
    To the memory


DR EMMA MUKHERJEE
                          Contents



  Maps and Illustration                                        ix

  Preface                                                      xi
  Introduction                                                  1
   IRFAN HABIB


                          BRAJ BHUM
1. Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                                   13
   IRFAN HABIB

2. Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography of Braj
   Bhum in Mughal Times                                        41
   IRFAN HABIB AND FAIZ HABIB


                          THE STATE

3. Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                 57
   TARAPADA MUKHERJEE AND IRFAN HABIB

4. The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan
   during the Reigns of Jahangir and Shahjahan                 91
   TARAPADA MUKHERJEE AND IRFAN HABIB

5. Dealing with Multiplicity: Mughal Administration in
   Braj Bhum under Aurangzeb (1659-1707)                      109
   IRFAN HABIB

                           PEASANTS
6. Land Rights in Braj Bhum during the Reign of Akbar         129
   TARAPADA MUKHERJEE AND IRFAN HABIB
viii                             Contents.

  7. The Peasants of Vrindavan                                149
       IRFAN HABIB

  8. From Arith to Radhakund: the History of a Braj Village   161
       IRFAN HABIB

  9. Land Holdings and Land-control in Village Rajpur         178
       IRFAN HABIB


                             GOSA’INS
10. A Documentary History of the Gosa ins of the Chaitanya
    Sect at Vrindavan, to c. 1740                             189
       IRFAN HABIB

       Bibliography                                           263
       Index                                                  269
                Maps and Illustration



Maps
                                                    facing page

 1. Braj Bhum, 1704                                         14

 2. Tax Incidence per unit of Recorded Area, 1595           48

 3. The Braj Heartland, 1595-1690                           72

 4. Vrindavan                                              150



Illustration
                                                    facing page
 Akbar’s farmdn confiming Jiv Gosa’in in position
 as Custodian of Madan Mohan and Govind-dev
 temples, 1568 (facsimile)                                  76
                              Preface



An account of how this volume came to be planned and then written,
largely on the basis of material collected by the co-author, the late
Dr Tarapada Mukherjee, is set out in some detail in the Introduction,
and so on it nothing need be said here. What needs to be recorded is
my sense of gratitude for the very kind approval given to the enterprise
by Dr (Mrs) Emma Mukherjee, herself a distinguished physician, when,
after her husband’s passing away, I explained the project to her in 1991.
Unfortunately, she too did not live to see the completion of work on
this volume. I am most grateful to the two daughters of Dr Tarapada
Mukherjee, Mrs Mimi Ray and Mrs Rimi Mukherjee Mehra, for having
so readily agreed to the publication of this joint work, when I approached
them for their consent.
   I recall with much gratitude the kindness of Shri Shrivats Goswami,
a leading divine of Vrindavan, who personally brought a heavy load of
photographs of the documents sent to me from London by Dr Tarapada
Mukherjee, that constitute the basic material for this book.
   In preparing the final text of the volume, I have been greatly aided by
the suggestions and comments of Professor Sayera I. Habib who has gone
through all the chapters of this volume.
   Faiz Habib, a skilled cartographer, has drawn the four maps. Chapter 2
originated as a paper co-authored by him.
   Professor Shireen Moosvi has organized the entire processing of the
text under the auspices of the Aligarh Historians Society (AHS), of which
she is the Secretary. I am most grateful for the many suggestions that she
has made while going through the processed text.
   Professor S.A. Nadeem Rezavi, Chairman, Department of History,
has organized the scanning of the entire set of documents, photographs
of which had been supplied to me by Dr Mukherjee. I am particularly
satisfied that they are now preserved and available for use by bona-fide
researchers.
xii                               Preface

    The text of the volume has been successively processed over the years
under the auspices of the AHS, by Mr Muneeruddin Khan, Ms Nazma
Khan, Mr Zeeshan Khan and Mr Saif Ali Khan, to all of whom sincere
thanks are due.
    I am very happy that Mr B.N. Varma, an old friend, agreed on behalf
of Primus Books to publish this book. Mr Benedict Joseph O’Hagan has
won my gratitude not only by his diligent copy-editing but also for giving
way whenever I preferred my English to King’s English. Now that the
book is in the readers hands, it would be too bold for me to claim that
it anywhere approaches ‘definitive history’ which Dr Tarapada Mukherjee
once hoped the rich information contained in the documents he had
collected could lead to. But if the reader is able to find some information
of a kind not usually to be encountered in conventional histories, I for one
would be satisfied.

Aligarh                                                       Irfan Habib
November 2019
                         Introduction
                               Irfan Habib




It was largely owing to the vision and effort of the co-author of the present
volume, the late Dr Tarapada Mukherjee (1928-90), that an exceptionally
large amount of very valuable documentary material became available to
the historians of Mughal India. Tarapada Mukherjee’s interest in Bengali
literature and its history made him choose Brajbuli poetry of the Bengali
Vaishnavites for the subject of his doctoral research; and his interests
widened from what the Vaishnavites wrote in Bengali and Sanskrit to the
authors themselves, notably the gosvdmls (usually spelt ‘goswdmis) of the
Chaitanya sect at Vrindavan. This ultimately led to a dedicated effort on
his part to collect all the material that he could track down which might
illumine for us the lives and activities of these Bengali divines in a region
so distant from Bengal.


The Documents

So in 1978 Dr Mukherjee, a member of the faculty of the School of
Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London, organized,
under auspices of the SOAS and with the support of the Vrindavan
Research Institute, a campaign to photograph all the old documents
that could be found in possession of the Chaitanya Goswamis (‘Gosa’ins’
in Braj) and their temples. The archives of the Govind-dev temples of
Vrindavan and Jaipur and the Radhakund temple were photographed,
as were the holdings of the Madan Mohan and Radha Damodar temples
deposited in the Vrindavan Research Institute (VRI), Vrindavan. Since
many documents had been submitted to courts in the course of litigation,
Dr Mukherjee’s team obtained permission to photograph documents
2                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 kept in case files stored in the strong room of the Mathura District court.
 (Unfortunately documents so retrieved are not identified as such in the
 photographs given to me).1 An important addition to the collection came
 in the late 1980s when the Institute of Vaishnav Studies, USA, provided
 him with a thick file of xeroxed copies of documents obtained from the
 Gopinath temples of Vrindavan and Jaipur.
    It was my good fortune to receive a letter from Dr Tarapada Mukherjee,
 dated 20 October 1986, in which he asked if we could collaborate on
 the Persian portion of the collection. So commenced our joint effort.
 I received, through his kindness and the aid of Shri Shrivats Goswami
 of Vrindavan, photographs and xerox copies of a large number of
Persian (including bilingual) documents; and Professor J.C. Wright, Dr
Mukherjee’s collaborator in London, very kindly furnished me with his
decipherments and translations of over thirty Braj documents.
    To this material I was able to add, with the assistance of Mr Zakir
Husain of the National Archives, copies of documents that the National
Archives of India, New Delhi, had acquired from sources in Vrindavan.
Later on I had occasion to consult and transcribe (from xerox copies
furnished to me) some of the National Archives’ further acquisitions
from Vrindavan.
    Dr Mukherjee and I published three joint papers in 1987, 1988, and
 1989-90, dealing with Mughal imperial grants to temples and priests,
from the time of Akbar to that of Shahjahan, and with the evidence that
the Vrindavan documents yielded about the nature of land rights in the
area during the reign of Akbar. These papers form Chapters 3, 4 and 6
of this volume.
    Struck by cancer which he faced with incredible bravery, Tarapada
Mukherjee passed away on 7 July 1990, His death left me alone to
continue with the analysis of the material I had been provided with.
There is no doubt that I have taken far too long a time (nearly three
decades) to come out with a volume that can claim to fulfil at least part of
Tarapada Mukherjee’s ambitious plan. My plea in my own defence is that
for this work to be completed, I needed to decipher, transcribe, arrange,
understand, and analyse a very large amount of material, mostly in the
Persian cursive script; and further that with Dr Mukherjee passing away,
I no longer had the advantage of his aid and guidance in the pursuit of
our joint enterprise.


   1 In a letter dated 18 January 1989, Dr Tarapada Mukherjee informed me that
photographs of all the documents in temple collections as well as the Mathura
Court’s strong room were deposited in the VRI as well as the library of SOAS,
London.
                               Introduction                              3

   A reader is bound to expect that there would be full and adequate
indications of sources in the volume that has come out of this effort.
References to printed texts and holdings of the National Archives have
posed no problems. But many of the photographs of documents Dr
Mukherjee sent me give no indication of the collection that they came
from. Often, when the collection is indicated, no number is given to locate
the document within that collection. Some photographs bear numbers;
others do not, and sometimes the numbers marked on the obverse and
reverse vary. It seemed to me that in such a situation the best way of
securing wider academic access to this collection was to transcribe the
documents on separate sheets and arrange them chronologically, so that
the text of a document can be traced simply by reference to its date. This
work has been completed, and from the photographs and xeroxed copies
received by me from Dr Tarapada Mukherjee all documents assignable
to the period down to about 1760 have been transcribed and arranged in
rough chronological order. The photographs and xerox copies collected
by Dr Tarapada Mukherjee have now been scanned at the Department of
History, Aligarh Muslim University, the collection being appropriately
named after him. Hopefully, my transcripts will also be scanned or
xeroxed and, like the photographs of the originals, be made available to
researchers. In such expectation, the Vrindavan documents are cited by
their transcript numbers in Chapter 5, which happens to be the piece
written last for this volume.


Their Value

It may, perhaps, not be out of place here to offer an assessment of the
historical value of the Vrindavan documents. There, of course, exist large
collections of official Mughal-period documents such as at Hyderabad
(the Telangana State Archives), and in the Inayat Jang collection at the
National Archives, New Delhi. We, then, have the rich material in the
Rajasthan State Archives, Bikaner, and the private family collections
obtained by the U.P. State Archives, Allahabad/Lucknow. Other State
Archives too are known to be rich in Mughal-period material. But in
terms of the variety of transactions with which it deals, the Vrindavan
collection, in its several repositories, might yet be unique. Contrary to
some assumptions in recent historical writing about the limitations of
power of the pre-colonial state, the Vrindavan Gosa’ins seem to have
found in the Mughal state an effective protector of their property rights
in both town and country, which made them anxious to get the terms
of their pettiest transactions recorded in Persian. There were parallel
4                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

authorities (the jagirdar, the imperial officials and the qdzi, for instance)
to whom appeals could be made, a multiplicity that set limits to local
despotism. Even in the religious sphere there was much greater ease
in ordinary life than what the official annals of Aurangzeb’s time, for
example, might suggest to have been the case. This does not exculpate
the Mughal Empire from being an apparatus of fiscal exploitation, but it
does weaken many other accusations against it, such as those of despotic
tyranny, and of lacking regulatory constraints.
   Another virtue of these documents is that through them we are enabled
to meet a number of individual men (and at least one woman, Krishna
Priya), mostly Gosa ins, whose biographies we can partly reconstruct (see
Chapter 10 of this volume). We even meet some peasants as historical
persons, whose genealogy, age at a particular time, aspects of appearance
and, sometimes, field-holdings we can learn about. Other classes are also
not left unrepresented, from merchants and bankers making gifts to the
gosa’ins to a poor woman Isarwi, seeking recompense from a gosd’in for
the destruction of her father’s hut. There is much to interest us too as
far as relations between Hindus and Muslims are concerned. We can
even seek evidence for the extent of ravages by smallpox from the huliyas
(descriptions of physical appearances) of a large number of individuals
prepared for legal purposes. We can also picture what some townships
or villages were like, such as Vrindavan, Radhakund and Rajpur, and
construct a history, even if fragmentary, of their inhabitants.
   As texts not prepared for public viewing, the limitations of our
material must also be recognized. Only such documents were deliberately
preserved as could influence recognition of the preservers’ ownership
rights and privileges or monetary and proprietary claims. Documents
outside this range are often chance survivals. Yet, with these undoubted
limitations the Vrindavan documents remain unique, for ordinary people
enter the record here to a far greater extent than in any other collection
of Mughal-period documents so far known to us. For all this, should we
not be ever grateful to the Gosa ins who preserved these papers and to the
late Dr Tarapada Mukherjee for so devotedly bringing them together?


Plan of the Volume

When Dr Tarapada Mukherjee and I began our collaborative effort, we had
in mind a rough plan to proceed with our studies, both thematically and
chronologically, and simultaneously to prepare calendars of documents
                               Introduction                               5

relevant to each theme and period that we happened to select. Three long
papers (Chapters 3, 4, and 6 in this volume) were jointly written by us
along these lines.
   After his passing away, one ambitious element of the plan, viz., the
preparation of calendars of the documents, had to be abandoned, for
the reason of the sheer length of time the work would have taken.
Translations and calendars already jointly prepared by us have, however,
been retained (in Chapters 3, 4, and 6).
   Though the writing (and revision) of the different parts of this
volume has been spread over thirty years, it hopefully fulfils much of
the rest of our original plan. Chapter 1 is designed to offer the reader
a general view of Braj Bhum in Mughal times by making use of both
the Vrindavan documents and other sources, Chapter 2 being its more
technical supplement. The next three chapters (3 to 5) concern the
Mughal administration in Braj Bhum and its conduct during the period
as it appears in our documents. The subsequent four chapters (6 to 9)
deal with the peasantry and agrarian society, one (Chapter 6) dealing
specifically with land rights as revealed by documents of Akbar’s reign
and the other three (Chapters 7, 8 and 9) being concerned with peasants
and other classes in three (originally) rural settlements, viz., Vrindavan,
Arith and Rajpur. The concluding section comprises the last chapter
(10), which contains biographical notices of the Gosa’ins themselves as
reconstructed from documents of the period, c.1550 to c.1750. Since such
biographical particulars are essential for understanding the contexts of
many of our documents, I have adopted a liberal, rather than restrictive
definition of ‘Gosa in’ in this chapter, practically accepting every one as
such who chose to adopt this designation.
   While I hope I have at least partly fulfilled the design that Dr Tarapada
Mukherjee had in mind, there are still problems with this volume which
with his keen eyes he would have surely spotted. One arises from the fact
that each of the ten papers that now appear as chapters were originally
written as practically independent pieces. This meant that when brought
together for publication in their original form, the reader, while going
through them, would have encountered a great deal of repetition. For
example, the collections of Vrindavan documents were described at
the beginning of every paper. Such repetition has now been avoided by
transferring the description of the sources to this Introduction. Less
easy has it been to deal with such transactions and events as have been
touched upon in more than one chapter because of their relevance in
the respective places. To the extent possible I have sought to reduce
6                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

the repetitive element by deleting some parts of the original papers and
shortening descriptions where they seemed too extensive; but a reader
may still feel that more could have been done in this respect, and that
Chapters 1 and 2, for example, should have been fully assimilated. I felt,
however, that, while desirable, an attempt to rewrite the text on such a
scale would have set back the volume’s publication for a long time and
would not by itself have added anything further to knowledge.
   A final word here. The entire text, including the three papers that
Dr Tarapada Mukherjee and I jointly wrote, has undergone considerable
revision, addition, and correction, as further reading of the material
yielded more facts and clarified certain matters, while fresh scrutiny of
Survey maps improved place-identifications. Additions also had to be
made to the calendars of documents attached to Chapters 4 and 6. Thus
to a great extent the volumes different chapters should be taken not as
mere reproductions of the original papers, but as their new versions.


Abbreviations

While citing from the collections of documents used, the following
abbreviations have been used throughout the volume:
cu              Collection unspecified in photograph of document cited
GD              Govind Dev Temple, Jaipur
H               Monica Horstmann, In Favour of Govinddevji: Historical
                Documents Relating to a Deity of Vrindaban and Eastern
                Rajasthan, New Delhi, 1999
IVS             (International) Institute of Vaishnava Studies/Gopinath
                Temple, Jaipur
Jal             Jaipur
Jhaveri         K.M. Jhaveri, Imperial Farmins (ad 1577 to 1805) granted
                to the Ancestors of... the Tikayat Maharaj, Bombay, 1928,
MM              Madan Mohan Temple, Vrindavan
NAI             National Archives of India, New Delhi
RD              Radha Damodar Temple, Vrindavan
RK              Radha Kund Temple, Radhakund
VRI             Vrindavan Research Institute, Vrindavan
W./Wright       Collection of Braj documents as arranged and numbered
                by Professor J.C. Wright
Note-. Full-stops have sometimes been inserted in the abbreviations, e.g.
R.D. instead of RD.
                                 Introduction                                  7

The following abbreviations are used for journals:

BSOAS          Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
IESHR          Indian Economic and Social History Review
JRAS          Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
JUPHS         Journal of UP Historical Society
PIHC           Proceedings of the Indian History Congress
SIPH          Studies in Peoples History


Forms of Names and Transliteration

Since the bulk of our documents are in Persian, one must recognize that
the Persian script has certain problems in reproducing Indian names.
First, there are no letters in Persian to represent Nagari letters d, the
hard r, and the harsh       and, second, short vowels (a, e, i, u) following
upon consonants are not indicated in normal Persian writing, while dai,
de and di are all written the same way. Further, g’ (as in ‘gun’) is not
often distinguished from ‘k’; and j’ often does duty for ‘ch’ as well. It is,
therefore, reasonable for one to prefer the form of a name as given in Braj
documents over the form found in Persian writing, so long as the name
is not derived from Arabic or Persian. No effort has been made in this
volume to restore or use the Sanskrit forms of personal names. So we have
read Seo Ram or Shiv Ram for the same person, both forms being found
in our Persian and Braj documents, but not Shiva Rama, or Siva Rama,
the usual transliteration of the Sanskrit form of that name; and so, to take
another instance, we have Bijai Singh, not Vijaya Simha.
   As far as transliteration in general is concerned, the Braj words and
names are rendered largely in accordance with the system adopted by
Platts, except that we have ‘sE and 'dJ for Platts ‘s’ and ‘sh’. For Persian (and
Arabic) the system of transliteration used in Steingass’s Persian-English
Dictionary has been followed, with some simplifications. To represent the
Arabic-Persian letter waw, we have used ‘v’ and ‘w’ indifferently. Thus
we have both the spellings vakil and wakil to represent the same Persian/
Arabic word.
    We have followed present-day official spellings of place names in the
case ofwell-known cities and towns, e.g. Agra, Delhi, Mathura, Vrindavan,
usually without applying diacritical marks. Where the spellings in our
documents are different from these, we use the earlier forms only when
quoting or summarizing those documents, e.g. Bindraban (often ‘corrected’
by us to ‘Brindaban’) for Vrindavan; and in such cases diacritical marks are
8                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

applied. We tend to prefer the earlier forms, where different from present
ones, e.g. ‘Arith’ over Radhakund (which too is used especially when
found alone in documents).
   For rivers the present-day official forms are used: thus we have in our
own text Yamuna, not Jamna, the name still in popular use.
   Some slight variations from the mode of transliteration here outlined
occur in Chapter 10, for which see the initial section of that chapter.


Dates

The dates in the Persian documents are given in Hijri and Ilahi eras. The
latter was officially followed from the late years of Akbar to 1637-38. It
was a solar era, with numbered years of each reign, beginning with the
first nauroz after each accession. Shahjahan shifted to the Hijri calendar
in 1637, but henceforth Hijri dates also began to be recalled in terms of
regnal years, each set of regnal years beginning with the first day of the
month specific to each reign. Our conversion of Hijri into Christian era
dates (Gregorian) is based on H.G. Cattenoz, Tables de Concordance des
eres Chre'tienne et Hegirienne, Paris, 1954. It should be borne in mind that
dates so obtained could vary from the actual dates, by one or two days,
since in India local moon sightings were used to set the beginning of each
month. Similarly, in our conversion of Ilahi into Christian era dates a
margin of error of + 1 day needs to be allowed, since, though it was based
on a solar calendar like the Christian era, the initial day of the Ilahi year,
namely, the Nauroz, did not necessarily fall on 21 March every year as we
have assumed. Finally, we have usually followed Professor J.C. Wright in
his conversion of Vikrama-Samvat dates found in Braj documents into
Christian era dates.


Short Glossary of Terms relating to Persian Documents

The following terms occur in the text of this volume more than once, and
it may be convenient for the reader to have the explanation of each such
term furnished here.

Bai'nama            Sale-deed.
Chakndma            Document demarcating limits of agricultural holding
                    or area of land-grant.
                              Introduction                               9

Dastak             Order granting permission or protection, e.g. road­
                   pass.
Farmdn             Imperial rescript, bearing the Emperor’s seal above the
                   text on the right side.
Hasbul hukm        Order usually issued by a minister on the Emperor’s
                   instructions.
Hiba-ndma          Deed of hiba or gift requiring immediate transfer of
                   gifted assets to designated beneficiary.
Mahzar             Statement of facts in relation to any matter or event,
                   usually signed or endorsed by a number of persons.
Nishan             Order issued by a prince of the imperial family.
Parwdna,           Order by an official usually issued to a subordinate or
 parwancha         set of subordinates.
Risdla             Report, communication.
                   Receipt, bond. Note: Acknowledgements of debt as
                   well as transferable bills of exchange (hundis) could be
                   deemed tamassuks.
Tashiha            Certificate verifying a grant or concession.
Tughra             Highly stylized writing, used to form a square or
                   rectangle, containing the name and title of the
                   emperor, set above the main text of a farmdn.
Zimn               Text on the back of a farmdn or other official order,
                   containing the "file’ on the matter at issue, consisting
                   of texts of earlier documents, if any, additional
                   particulars, remarks of officials and, placed usually at
                   the top, a record of the final processing of the case.


Previous Publication Details of
Chapters of this Volume
(Note: PIHC = Proceedings of the Indian History Congress)
Chapter 1       Irfan Habib, ‘Braj Bhum in Mughal Times’, PIHC., 70th
                session (2010, Delhi), pp. 266-84.
Chapter 2       Irfan Habib and Faiz Habib, ‘The Political and Economic
                Geography ofBraj Bhum: from Mughal Official Records’,
                PIHC, 73rd session (2012, Mumbai), pp. 490-504.
Chapter 3       Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘Akbar and the
                Temples of Mathura and its Environs’, PIHC, 48th
                session (1987, Goa), pp. 234-50. Lacks translations of
                Documents and Appendix.
10                Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Chapter 4    Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘The Mughal
             Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan during
             the Reigns of Jahangir and Shahjahan’, PIHC, 49th
             session (1988, Dharwad), pp. 287-300.
Chapter 5    Irfan Habib, ‘Dealing with Multiplicity: Mughal
             Administration in Braj Bhum under Aurangzeb’, Studies
             in People's History, vol. 3, issue 2, December 2016,
             pp. 151-64.
Chapter 6    Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘Land Rights in
             the Reign of Akbar: the Evidence of the Sale Deeds of
             Vrindavan and Arit ha', PIHC, 50th session (1989-90,
             Gorakhpur), pp. 236-55.
Chapter 7    Irfan Habib, ‘The Peasants of Vrindavan in Mughal
             Times’, in        Evolution of a Nation: Pre-Colonial to
             Post-Colonial—Essays in Memory of R.S. Sharma, ed.
             D.N. Jha, Delhi: 2014, pp. 235-46.
Chapter 8    Irfan Habib, ‘From Arith to Radhakund: the History
             of a Braj Village in Mughal Times’, PIHC, 71st session
             (2010-11, Maida), pp. 284-99.
Chapter 9    Irfan Habib, ‘Rajpur: Land Holdings and Land Control
             in a Braj Village in Mughal Times’, PIHC, 72nd session
             (2011, Patiala), pp. 368-77.
Chapter 10   Irfan Habib, ‘A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins
             (Goswamis) of the Chaitanya Sect at Vrindavan’, in
             Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, ed. Margaret H. Case,
             New Delhi: 1996, pp. 131-60.
BRAJ BHUM
                              CHAPTER 1



           Braj Bhum in Mughal Times
                                 Irfan Habib




The Name and Limits of the Region

When ‘Vraja’, to give to ‘Braj’ its Sanskrit form, came into use as the name
of the territory around Mathura, containing the sites of Lord Krishna’s
youthful adventures, is difficult to establish. It does not seem to have been
used in ancient Indian texts as a territorial name, its proper sense being
that of cattle-shed, herd, flock, etc.1 A popular verse in the local dialect,
quoted by H.M. Elliot in 1844, speaks of‘Braj chaurasi, as if there were
eighty-four villages in the Braj territory.12 In the Vrindavan documents,
the first reference to it as a territory appears to occur in a Braj deed of vs
1651/ad 1594, recording the sale of a piece of land in Vrindavan by the
village headmen (panch), who are all said to be ‘Brajbasi’, natives of‘Braj’
(Wright 6); and later in vs 1697/ad 1640 when Ranajit and six others

    1 See Monier Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, 2nd edn.,
Oxford, 1899, p. 1042 (s.v. vraja).
    2 For the traditional perceptions of Braj territory see H.M. Elliot, Memoirs
- • - of the Races of the North-Western Provinces, revised and edited by John
Beames, London, 1869, vol. II, pp. 57-8 n., and F.S. Growse, Mathura: a District
Memoir, orig. pub. 1882, repr., New Delhi, 1979, pp. 80-91. The popular belief,
as Elliot noted in the present case, was that chaurasi signified the inclusion in
Braj territory of all places within a radius of 84 kos from Mathura. But this is not
the usual sense attached to the term chaurasi, which simply means a group of 84
villages (see ibid., vol. II, pp. 47-55). Braj may properly be defined in religious
terms as the territory containing the main spots of the Krishna lore, for which
sec A.W, Entwistle, Braj: Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage, Groningen, 1987.
14                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

of the same township, selling land to a gosai (goswdmi), call themselves
‘samast Birajbdsi, indicating thereby that all of them belong to Biraj or
Braj (Wright 8). However, there is little indication in our documents
about the extent of the territory going by the name Braj until the name
Braj Bhum, ‘Braj land’, makes its appearance in 1704, in a parwana of
Mukhtar Khan, Governor of the province of Agra, where a list of parganas
or sub-districts constituting it is also furnished: thirteen on the right side
of the Jamna (Yamuna) and five on the left.34
   Except for Anupnagar (mod. Anupshahr), all the parganas in this
‘official’ list lie within the region of the Braj dialect. The name ‘Braj’,
adopted by linguists for the dialect is, however, recent. Banarsldas, who
wrote his Ardh-kathanak (1641) in Braj, designates the language he was
writing in as either des-bhasbd or just bhdshdj whereas in the Tubfatu’l
Hind, written in the late years of Aurangzebs reign, it is simply called
bhdkha (‘kh’ being the usual transcription in Persian of the hard Sanskrit
‘sh’).5 (For the language employed in documents presumably intended to
be read out to ordinary rural folk, see the closing portion of Chapter 7,
‘The Peasants of Vrindavan’).
   It is clear, then, that ‘Braj’ as the name for the territory around
Mathura had a religious, not a linguistic, connotation, being the area in
which pilgrimages were to be made to places that were related in tradition
to episodes in the Krishna legend. Since traditions, as well as names,
disappear, revive, or are invented, the late dates of the use of Braj in a
territorial sense raises the question whether such use of it was not a gift
of Shri Chaitanya and his followers. One recalls that the poetry about
Krishna and Radha that the Chaitanya sect inspired in Bengal in the
latter part of the sixteenth century, and which later was composed in


    3 Vrindavan Docs. (G.D.): copy of original with attestation by the qazi whose
seal bears the year ah 1121/ad 1709. The same list of parganas is given in a
statement on behalf of the zaminddrs, etc., of these parganas, made after 1710
(also in G.D. Coll.).
    4 Banarsldas, Ardhakathanak, text printed by Mukund Lath, in Appendix II
to his English translation of the work, Haifa Tale, Jaipur, 1981, pp. 223-75. Lath
uniformly renders the words des-bhasba and bhdsha as ‘Hindi’ in his translation.
    ' See, for example, Mirza Khan (Jan?), Tubfatu’l Hind (c.1707), Preface. I have
had access to six MS copies in Maulana Azad Library, AMU, and one in the
Department of History, AMU, Acc. No. 67, of this valuable work on Indian arts,
manners, and language, with particular reference to what today would be called
the Braj region. I have not been able to use the printed text, ed. Nurul Hasan
Ansari, Tehran, 1968.
map   1        BRAJ BHUM, 1704




          77                     Paiz Habib
                           Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                            15

a form of Bengali verse called Brajbuli, ‘the Braj speech’.6 In his order
(parwdna), Mukhtar Khan, Governor of Agra, noted particularly that
Rup and Haridas (early disciples of Shri Chaitanya), who had established
themselves at Bindraban (the usual local form of the name Vrindavan),
which was then ‘all jungle and uninhabited’, had enjoined their followers
and successors ‘to worship Divinity, to travel within Braj Bhum and not
to pursue mendicancy and residence anywhere outside Braj Bhum’.7 This
also bears out the special position of sanctity that Braj Bhum held for
the Chaitanya goswamis (‘gosa’ins’ or ‘gusa’ins’ in Vrindavan documents),
so that their pilgrimage circuits defined its limits, largely confining it to
the eighteen parganas, listed by Mukhtar Khan, all but two of which lay
within the northern parts of the Agra suba (province).
   The eighteen parganas listed by Mukhtar Khan as belonging to Braj
Bhum were, west of the Yamuna: (1) Mathura, (2) Sahar, (3) Mangotla
(Maghora), (4) 01, (5) Ao, (6) Pahari, (7) Kaman, (8) Khoh or Koh Mujahid,
(9) Noh, (10) Khohri, (11) Hodal, (12) Palwal, and (13) Faridabad; and
east of Yamuna: (14) Mahaban (including tappa Mat), (15) Sa'dabad, (16)
Jalesar, (17) Koi (Aligarh), and (18) Anupnagar (Anupshahr)8*11 (see Map 1).


    6 Cf. Sukumar Sen, History of Bengali Literature, New Delhi, 1960,
pp. 103 ff.
    7 See footnote 3 above for reference to the source of this quotation.
    8 Vrindavan Docs, (G.D.), copy of parwdna dated 7 February 1704. All the
parganas listed, except Nos. (13), (15) and (18), are found tn the pargana lists in
Abu’l Fazl, A’in-i Akbari, ed. H. Blochmann, vol. I, pp. 442-55 & 518-20. Nos.
1, 3, 4, 5, 14, and 16 belonged to sarkdr Agra (pp. 443-4); Nos. 2, 6, 7, 8, and
11 to sarkdr Sahar (pp. 454-5); Nos. 9 and 17 to sarkdr Koi; No. 10 to sarkdr
Alwar; and No. 12 to sarkdr Delhi. For their locations, see Irfan Habib, An Atlas
of the Mughal Empire, Delhi, 1982, Sheets 4A, 6A, and 8A, The three parganas
that do not appear in the A’in-i Akbari duly appear in the pargana lists compiled
in the early 1690s (British Library, Add. 6586, ff. 90b-86b, the folios being
numbered right to left, while they are so bound as to run left to right!). In this
list, pargana Faridabad (No. 13) appears under sarkdr Delhi in place of pargana
Tilpat listed in the d’in, while Sa'dabad (No. 15) and Anupnagar (No. 18), under
sarkdr Koi (f. 92a), were new parganas. It is curious that pargana Nonehra
(Nonera) within sarkdr Sahar is not included among the Braj Bhum parganas,
though Hodal to the north of it is. Equally surprising is the omission of pargana
Maholi, whose headquarters stood so close to Mathura, at just a few kilometres
south-west of it.
    Since sarkdr Delhi belonged to suba Dehli, it is not clear what authority
Mukhtar Khan, as Governor of Agra, had to include two of its parganas, Palwal
and Faridabad, within Braj Bhum.
16                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

The same list is repeated verbatim in a statement made in 1710 or soon
thereafter by zamlndars, local officials and headmen of the same parganas
in which they too refer to the Chaitanya mendicants who, ‘settled in
Bindraban [Vrindavan], engage in the worship of the Lord and wander
within Braj Bhum’ (GD, unnumbered).
    In this chapter we will broadly follow the limits set by the parganas
listed in the earlier two documents, and exclude other areas of the Mughal
province of Agra (including Agra itself) that might belong to the Braj
zone linguistically, but do not fall within the territory of that name as
delimited by the Mughal administration.


Agriculture

Of this area, as of other parts of the Upper Gangetic Basin, our major
source of geographical and economic information from Mughal times is
the Ain-iAkbart, compiled by Abu’l Fazl, c. 1595. From the official statistics
for each pargana or subdistrict that it offers, we obtain precise figures for
‘measured land’ (drazi). These represent the extent of ‘gross cultivation’
(where double-cropped land is counted twice) but also included land held
to be available for cultivation (including fields currently unsown). With
British-period statistics, comparison has to be made in large blocks since
Mughal boundaries diverged considerably from British ones, and only large
blocks would sufficiently reduce the possible margins of error. Fortunately

    As for Khohri at No. 10 in the list of parganas of Braj Bhum, it must be
Khohri Rana, a pargana in sarkar Alwar in the Am-iAkbans tables (I, p. 452),
and not Hasanpur Kori, also listed among parganas of that sarkar. This is made
certain by the separate entries for Khohri and Hasanpur Khohri under sarkar
Alwar in Br. Lib. Add. 6586, f. 91a. In Irfan Habib, Atlas of the Mughal Empire,
Sheet 6A, Khohri Rana is shown as situated near the north-western corner of
the sarkar of Alwar, placing it very far from the extreme western limits of Braj
Bhum. The correct position seems to be represented rather by the village Khori,
placed in the quarter-inch map at 27° 35’ N., 76° 59’ E., i.e. near the eastern
limits of sarkar Alwar, immediately adjacent to Braj Bhum.
    Incidentally, the first mention of Mathura as sarkar headquarters (involving
its own transfer from sarkar Agra and merger with the previous sarkar of Sahar)
occurs in a Vrindavan document of 1696, while till 1695 Mathura is described as
a pargana within sarkar Agra (Akbarabad).
    One may note in passing that the placing of Noh (No. 9) to the west of the
Yamuna implies that the river Yamuna had then taken a course to the east of Noh
Jhil, a fair possibility judging from the still existing flood channels in the area.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                              17

for us, Shireen Moosvi has carried out the necessary calculations. The
part of Braj Bhum that lay to the east of the Yamuna River falls within
her ‘Middle Doab’ block, and the part west of that river partly within her
‘Agra block. She has found that in the Middle Doab, Gross Cultivation
in 1595 was about 74.64 per cent of what it was in 1909-10, but in Agra
it was as high as 98.29 per cent. These percentages are among the highest
(that for the Agra block is, indeed, the highest) in Uttar Pradesh as a
whole, where overall the gross cultivation in 1595 was just 52.84 per cent
of what it was in 1909-10? (But see our fresh scrutiny of the evidence in
Chapter 2 of this volume).
    It may thus be supposed that, relatively speaking, Braj Bhum in Mughal
 times was not a region with extensive wastes and forest, being different
 in this regard from many other parts of the country. Such a situation
was also implied by the Dutch factor, Pelsaert, who in speaking of the
 territory around Agra in 1626, wrote that ‘trees are plentiful around the
 city but very scarce in the open country; even four or five trees usually
 mark the site of a village’.9
                             1011
    There is no evidence of any canal passing through the Braj Bhum
 territory, and cultivation must, therefore, have largely depended upon
 precipitation and wells. It is doubtful if the Persian wheel (the geared
 saqiya) had come into use in the area. It is true that a Braj document of
 1558 refers to a renta (a possible corruption of robot) while giving details
 of demarcation of land sold at Vrindavan, then still a small village. But
 renta here probably refers to a species of tree of this name, viz., rithd in
 Hindi.11
    From the AJn-i Akbans tables of dasturs or tax-rates on individual
 crops, we obtain lists of crops cultivated in different tracts. The parganas
 in Braj Bhum were distributed among the dastur~circ\es of Agra, Bayana,
 Sahar, Pahari, Thana Farida, and Koi. Of rabi crops as many as nineteen
 were raised in the Agra circle; and all of these, except Kabuli gram, were
 cultivated in the other circles, except for Koi (modern Aligarh) where


    9 Shireen Moosvi, The Economy of the Mughal Empire, c.1595: A Statistical
Study, 2nd edn,, New Delhi, 2015, p. 51.
    10 Francisco Pelsaert, Jahangir’s India: The Remonstrantie of Francisco Pelsaert,
tr. W.H. Moreland and P. Geyl, Cambridge, 1925, p. 48.
    11 R.D. Coll., Wright No. 3. According to Platts’s Dictionary, both rent and
rahanta are corruptions of rahat. But Wright’s rendering of renta as Persian wheel
is questionable because the Persian version of this document (VRI, SI. No. 56,
Acc. No. 13) dated 1569 has 'rahanta tree’ instead, which means that a species
of tree rather than a Persian wheel was intended in the earlier Braj version.
18                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

the rate for fenugreek too is not entered. In the kharif harvests, the Agra
circle has rates entered against twenty-five crops; Sahar and Pahari have
kori millet in addition; Bayana has this last crop but lacks china and bdjra.
Koi and Thana Farida have all the kharif crops that are recorded for Agra
except that both lack rapeseed, but Thana Farida does have kori. It is
possible that being a low-rated crop, like arhar’, kori was simply not
deemed worth taxing in certain parganas)1 Despite the few variations, the
number of crops raised by the peasants is certainly impressive.
    We have no means of knowing the extent of land occupied by each
of the numerous crops. Probably, the inferior foodgrains dominated
the cropping. The thick paunda sugarcane and the ordinary variety of
sugarcane, as well as indigo, appear on the rated crop lists of all the dastur-
circles of the region. But the famous Bayana indigo tract lay well to the
south of Braj Bhum. The only locality within Braj Bhum which produced
indigo for long-distance trade was that around Koi (Aligarh) across the
Yamuna. According to Pelsaert, writing in 1626, it was mainly bought by
Armenian, Lahore and Kabuli’ merchants; and the annual yield was about
1,000 bales or about 100,320 kg.1213 The figure, however, is probably for the
whole Kol-Khurja tract. It may be presumed that proximity to Agra, the
Mughal capital city with a population of about half a million or more in
its days of glory,14 should have encouraged the growth of higher-quality
crops for the market that the city furnished.


Rural Society

The fact that the tax-rates per unit of area (bigha-i ildhi) for each crop
given in the Ajn-i Akbari are all in terms of money shows that money
relations widely prevailed in the villages. In 1704, when villages in the
eighteen parganas of Braj Bhum were required to provide charity payments
to gosd’ins (goswamis) of Rup s line, through an order of the Governor
of Agra, the levy was again in terms of money, namely, one rupee per


   12 The dastur rates by circles for ceuba Agra will be found in the A’ln-i Akbari,
ed. H. Blochmann, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, vol. I, pp. 356-63. I have collated the
tables in the printed edn. with those in Br. Lib. MSS Add. 7652 and Add. 6552.
   13 Pelsaert, op. cit., p. 15. For references to Koi indigo in other Mughal-period
sources, see Irfan Habib, Atlas of the Mughal Empire, Delhi, 1982, p. 33, col. a.
For the bale/churl of indigo and its weight, see idem, The Agrarian System of
Mughal India, 3rd edn., New Delhi, 2014, pp. 430-31.
   14 Ibid., 3rd edn., p. 83.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                           19

                                                                         The
village per year, half a rupee to be paid at each of the two harvests.1516
Vrindavan documents consist, in a fairly large part, of deeds recording
sales of agricultural land, and these again show prices being paid in money.
It is only in an early deed of land-sale in Vrindavan, recorded in 1558 in
Braj, that the sellers, who claim to be thepancb (peasant-headmen) of the
village, receive Rs.60 in cash (rok) and Rs. 10 in garments {pahardvam).'"'
Such part-payments in kind (small as these were) disappear entirely from
subsequent records of sales.
    Our documents reveal to us a well differentiated village society, created
partly by the way the caste system imposed deprivation on many, and
partly by the way taxation and money circulation introduced considerable
variations among peasants with regard to the size of resources and area
of land cultivated by them. We get a glimpse of the deprivation when
we come across a simple entry in a document of 1692, prepared for the
purpose of laying down limits of a land-grant, held in seven plots, in the
village of Rajpur (near Vrindavan). In specifying the boundaries of each
plot, the fields (kisht) of individual persons (e.g. the field of Raghunath
the Brahman or of Tubi Singh, Gangaram, etc.) are carefully mentioned,
but for defining the northern boundary of the seventh plot, we have the
simple entry kisht-i Chamardn-i mauza Rajpur, ‘the field of the Chamars
of village Rajpur*. The entry implies that a plot of village land was left to
be cultivated by the ‘untouchable* Chamars of the village, presumably in
return for the labour services (including the removal of dead animals) they
were subject to. In the present case either the co-sharers in that field were
too numerous, or thought to be of too inferior a station, to allow their
being individually named.
    Our documents seldom mention the caste of peasants who appear as
headmen or sellers. But in a sale deed of land dated 1594 in a village
near Vrindavan the two peasants who sold it are called Gaurua;17 as are


    15 Vrindavan Docs. (G.D.): Copy of Mukhtar Khans parwdna-, see also
statement of zamlndars, etc., of the same parganas, made post-1710, also in the
G.D. Collection,
    16 Vrindavan Documents (RD), Wright 3. A Persian document of 1569 (RD
Coll.) recording the sellers’ statement about the same transaction only affirms
their having received Rs.60 in cash. A sale-deed in Braj of 1548 (?), about a
transfer of land in village Arith (Radhakund), records the receipt of Rs.20 along
with four pieces of cloth (pichord) by the sellers (Wright No. 2). The Persian
record of this transaction, dated 1577 (MM Coll.), omits any reference to the
gift of cloth here as well.
    17 IVS 208.
20                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

the three brothers who sell the land, with muqaddami (headmans rights
thereto) in 1653 in the hamlet of Nagu at Vrindavan,18 and in 1654 in a
land transfer deed the two brothers selling the land, and the cultivator of
a neighbouring field, as well as the surety, are all described as Gauruas.19
There being no other peasant caste mentioned in documents relating to
the locality of Vrindavan, it may be assumed that Gauruas formed the
dominant peasant caste of the locality. Gauruas seem to have formed the
dominant peasant caste as well in Arith (Radhakund), the other Braj
village with which many of our documents are concerned (see Chapter 8).
In the nineteenth century the Gauruas were held to form an ‘inferior’ class
of Rajputs, who, as was the case with many peasant castes at the time,
maintained the custom of levirate or widow remarriage,20
    The Vrindavan documents are important in showing that the panch of
the village were really a group of dominant peasants, styled muqaddams
in the Persian documents, being generally empowered to sell away, or
lease out, vacant land of the village. It also seems that the position of
a panch was partly hereditary, possibly by some form of primogeniture.
Since these matters have been discussed elsewhere, it may not perhaps be
useful to claim space for them here as well.21
    What we may consider a little more closely is the religiously composite
nature of the panch. In 1594 thirteen panch of village Dosaich, and
hamlets Nagu and Bhanan, situated within Vrindavan, sold a plot of land
to Raja Man Singh of Amber, the deed for which exists in both Persian
and Braj versions. Of the thirteen joint sellers, three bear Muslim names,
viz., Nizam, Humaun/Humyan, and Nasso (Nasir).22 In another sale-deed
of 1601, of the seven peasants named as sellers (styled zammdars here,
not headmen), two (Junaid and Najm) are Muslims.23 The names of the
fathers of the sellers in both these documents are not given; but the case
of‘All Khan in a subsequent generation suggests that the Muslims were

     18 G.D. 39,
     19 G.D. Coll.
    20 Cf. H.M. Elliot, Memoirs . . . of the Races of the North Western Provinces of
 India, revd. and ed. John Beames, vol. I, p. 115; and Anonymous, A Gazetteer of
 Delhi (1883-4), Lahore, 1884, p. 76.
    21 See Habib, Agrarian System, pp. 148-52. The British revenue system
 eliminated the role of the panch, which survived as a term for merely ‘respectable
 men’ in the countryside, vide William Crooke, A Rural and Agricultural Glossary
for the N.W. Provinces and Oudh, Calcutta, 1888, repr., New Delhi, 1989,
 p. 217 (s.v. Panchayat).
    22 Vrindavan Docs: G.D. (Persian); Wright No. 6.
    23 R.D. Coll. 136.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                          21

probably converts from the same caste. In a bilingual (Persian and Braj)
document of 1654 concerning a land-sale transaction in Vrindavan, the
sellers are two Gaurua brothers with Hindu names, who presented ‘All
Khan, son of Angad, son of Raghu Gaurua, as a surety on their behalf21 A
similar situation is found at Arith (Radhakund). In the sixteenth century
Raghunath Das and Jiv Goswami acquired much land in Arith from its
headmen (panch), as attested by deeds of 1545, 1546, 1548 (?), 1577 (5
deeds), and 1579. In each deed, the names of a whole set of persons
as sellers is given, all of them bearing Hindu names. When in 1641,
some dispute arose over the land, the headmen of Arith (five names are
mentioned) gave a paper confirming the earlier transfers of land that had
been made by ‘our ancestors (buzurgariy. They were headed now by Bari,
styled Bari Khan in another document (of 1642).24    25 All other headmen
were Hindus. If the earlier headmen were really ancestors to the present
ones, Bari Khan must have been a convert, a change that did not still
affect his position in the village. A late document (of 1717) suggests that
the peasants at Arith too were Gauruas, for the two peasant sellers of land
here are described as belonging to this caste.26 Caste affiliation, in both
Vrindavan and Arith, thus seems to have remained unaffected by change
of religion and continued to be the main factor in determining status in
village society.
    The Vrindavan documents tell us little about the class that stood
above the peasants, the zammdars, though the term begins to appear in
seventeenth-century documents beginning with the one of 1601 referred
to earlier. One man who appears in a document of 1558 could have well
belonged to this class: ‘The thdkur of Sei, All Khan, chaudhurij as he is
described in the Braj version, helped Jiv Goswami obtain a plot of land
in Vrindavan. In the Persian version of the same document prepared in
1569 he is simply styled ‘the muqaddam (headman)’ of the same village of
Sei.27 Possibly in that village he did not share the headmen’s rights with
anyone else.
    Fortunately for us the Aln-i Akbari gives us the names of the castes
of zamlndars of each pargana, along with the numbers of their armed
retainers. Table 1.1 reproduces the data it provides for the parganas that
later came within the limits of what in 1704 was called Braj Bhum:

  24 G.D. Coll.
  25 The document of 1640 belongs to RD Coll., and that of 1642, to M.M.
  26 G.D. (Persian).
  27 For the 1558 Braj version see Wright 3; the 1569 Persian version is in R.D.
Collection, =VRI, S.I. No. 56, Acc. No. 13.
22                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

                      TABLE 1.1 Zamindars of Braj Bhum, 1595

        Pargana               Caste                        Horse        Foot
     1. 01                    Rajput, Brahman                 100       1,000
     2. Ao                    Shaikhzada (Indian Muslim)      100        500
     3. Jalesar               Gahlot, Suraj, Bankra          400        5,000
  4. Mahavan                  Sayyids, Brahmans, & c.        200       2,000
     5. Mathura              -                                 -            -
     6. Mangotla             Rajput and others                20         400
     7. Ahar                 Muslims, Brahmans                20         400
  8. Koi                     Chau han, Jakhara               450      29,050
  9. Noh                     Rajput, Jat, Afghan             100       3,000
 10. Khohri                  Khanzadas of Mewat, etc.        900       5,000
 11. Pahari                  Rahya, Thatar                    20          70
 12.    Sahar                Bachhal, Gujar, Jat,            200       7,000
                             Kachhwaha
 13. Kaman                   Meo, Jat, Ahir                    10        300
 14. Koh Mujahid             Meo, Jat                          -         200
 15. Hodal                   Jat, etc.                         10        200
 16. Palwal                  Rajput, Gujar                    25         500
 17. Tilpat                  Rajput, Brahman, Gujar           40         400
        (later Faridabad)
Note: Parganas Nos. 1-7 belong to sarkdr Agra; Nos. 7-9, to sarkdr Koi; No. 10
to sarkdr Aiwar, Nos. 11-15 to sarkdr Sahar; and Nos. 16 and 17 to sarkdr Delhi.
Except for the last pair (Nos. 16 and 17). which belonged to aeiiba Delhi, all
others belong to aeiiba Agra. Parganas Anupnagar and Sa'dabad did not exist in
1595.
Source: Table 1.1 has been compiled by collating Blochmann’s ed. of the Aln-i
Akbari, I, pp. 442 ff., with Br. Lib. MSS. Add. 7652 and Add. 6552.


    In Table 1.1 the absence of any data for zamindar castes and their
retainers in the pargana of Mathura (which contained Vrindavan) seems
surprising. Perhaps, the pargana was held to be mainly urban with few
villages. In general, the peasant castes, viz., Jats, Meos, Ahirs and Gujars,
find better representation among zamindars recorded under the parganas
of sarkdr Sahar (Nos. 11-15), that is, in the areas further west from the
Yamuna, than in the core Braj areas where the upper castes, Rajputs,
                           Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                            23

Brahmans, Shaikhzadas, etc., appear to dominate. The names of some
castes are not easy to decipher. It is possible that the Jat uprising of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries substantively altered the situation:
as Elliot’s map of ‘Zamindari Possession’ in 1844 shows, two large blocks
of Jat zamindars had by now been created near Mathura on both sides
of the river Yamuna.28 See Chapter 2 for more on zamindar castes and
communities.
    If the Jat example shows how successful insurgents could turn into
zamindars, the Mughal administration could also plant its own men and
make them zamindars (i.e. recognize them as holders of zamindari rights
and privileges) in order to strengthen or, indeed, create local support
for its authority. Thus Hasan ‘All Khan, appointed faujdar of Mathura
in December 1669, established Shah Muhammad Nawaz, Saidam
Baloch, Sahikh Razlu’ddm, Lal Muhammad, and .Nazar Muhammad as
permanent zamindars of particular tracts in his jurisdiction.29 In fact, a
parwana whose text survives shows how this was managed. This official
document recites that Hasan ‘Ali Khan, as faujdar of the chakla (territorial
division) of‘Islamabad, that is Mathura’, recommended to the Emperor
that one Qasim, son ofDaulat, who had been assigned in jagir 25 villages
in pargana Sahar, ‘a haven of insurgents’, be recognised as zamindar of the
same villages, so as to be held responsible for the collection and payment
of revenue in the time of the succeeding jagirdars of the area, after the
transfer of his ownjagir. The parwana says that the proposal was approved
by the Emperor and a farman to this effect was being issued.30
   Before we leave agrarian society, a word about cattle and their owners.
We have noted that by Moosvi’s estimation the extent of Gross Cultivation
in 1595 in Middle Doab was less than 75 per cent of what it was in 1909-

    28 See Maps in Habib, Agrarian System, p. 394.
    29 Saqi Musta‘id Khan, Ma'dsir-i ‘Alamgri, ed. Agha Ahmad Ali, Bib. Ind.,
Calcutta, pp. 92-93, 100. Not all the men who were made zamindars were local
men. Shaikh Raziuddin, we are told, was a native of Bhagalpur, Bihar: as the
head-clerk (peshkar) of Hasan ‘Ali Khan, he is said to have taken an active part
in the operations that led to the capture of Gokula, the Jat chief, in 1670 (ibid.,
Pp. 93-4).
    30 The document is included in the well-known collection of administrative
documents, the Nigamama-i Munsbi, compiled by ‘Malikzada’ in 1680, litho.
Nawal Kishor, Lucknow, 1882, p. 152. Since Mathura was given the name
Islamabad in 1670 (Ma’asir~i ‘Alamgiri, pp. 95-6) and Hasan ‘All Khan ceased to
be the faujdar of Mathura well before 1675, when his successor Mubariz Khan
was transferred from the post (ibid., p. 152), the parwana must have been issued
in the early 1670s.
24                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 10. This would mean that a much larger area for grazing was available in
 Akbar’s time than in the early twentieth century, in at least the Trans­
 Yamuna portion of Braj Bhum.
    There was a natural temptation for the State to tax cattle (gau shumdrt)
 or levy grazing duty (kdh-chardt)f There was an equally natural urge
 on the part of cattle-owners to secure tax exemptions. We have thus a
farman of Akbar of March 1581 granting the plea of the Vallabhi high
 priest ‘Bithalrai, Brahman’, seated at Gokul, to graze his cattle without
 any constraint both in the khdlisa (imperial reserve territory) and in the
JdgirsJ2 In 1588 Abdu’r Rahim Khankhanan, probably as ajagirddr, issued
 an order to officials of pargana Ao to the effect that since four named
villages of the pargana contained grazing fields for ‘bulls and cows of
 Govardhan’, there was to be no imposition of qurq (confiscation) and
gau-shumdfi (cattle-tax) on the cattle there.31
                                              33 In 1593-4 & farman from
                                              32
Akbar directed that in the four parganas of Mathura, Sahar, Mangotia
and Ao, peacocks were not to be hunted and no restrictions were to be
 imposed on cattle grazing.34 It appears that the temples, or their priests
 (pujaris'), t0° maintained herds of cattle. Early in 1658 Dara Shukoh
issued an order through an officer of his to remit gdu-shumari on the
cattle of the Govind-dev temple of Vrindavan, ‘as it had been remitted
under previous jagirdars'.35 These cattle were also taken or kept across
the Yamuna, for in 1659 it was an officer of Aurangzeb who issued an
order addressed to officials of pargana Mahaban remitting gau-shumari
on the cows of the Govind-dev, Gopinath and Madan Mohan temples (all
of Vrindavan) grazing in the vicinity of village Mansarovar.36 A separate
order from the same official later that year mentions cattle (mawasht)
of the Madan Mohan temple being kept at two other named villages of
pargana Mahavan and orders that they be allowed to graze there and at



   31 Habib, Agrarian System, pp. 284-85.
   32 K.M. Jhaveri (ed.), Imperial Jarmans (ad 1577 to ad 1803) granted to the
Ancestors of... the Tikayat Maharaj, Bombay, 1928: Doc. II. Doc. Ill is a similar
order issued by Akbar’s mother, Hamlda Banu Begam in 1581. Bithalrai is surely
Vitthalnath, son of the celebrated devotional teacher, Vallabhacharya and
preceptor of the famous Braj poet Surdas. Cf. J.S. Hawley, Surdas, Poet, Singer,
Saint, Delhi, 2018, esp. pp. 6, 8, 11-21.
   33 Jhaveri, op. cit., Doc. IIIA.
   34 Ibid., Doc. IVA.
   35 G.D. Coll.
   36 Ja'far Saljuql’s parwana, G.D. Coll.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                          25

Mansarovar without let or hindrance.37 Unfortunately, the numbers of
cattle involved are not given.


Towns

The major town of Braj Bhum was Mathura, with a history dating back
to Mauryan times, if not earlier. In 1595 it was the headquarters of a
pargana, being placed within the sarkdr of Agra. It was only as late as
 1695-6 that it was separated from Agra and made the headquarters of
a sarkdr, under the official name of Islamabad, with the parganas of the
erstwhile sarkdr of Sahar brought under it.38 Mathura also came to possess
a rupee mint during the late years of Aurangzebs reign, though its output
seems to have remained small.39
   If one wishes to study how a town or township could arise and grow in
Mughal times, then it is not Mathura, but Vrindavan, over 10 kilometres
away, on which our documents give us invaluable information. Within
the pargana of Mathura, on the same side of the Yamuna, was the village
of Dosaich. In Dosaich’s vicinity, Shri Chaitanya is said to have located
the site of Radha’s garden, the Vrindavana of holy legend.40 As we noted
earlier, the Governor of Agra issued an official order in 1704 crediting Rup
and Haridas, who were Chaitanyas disciples, with having established their
residence in Bindraban (so spelt) when it was ‘all jungle and uninhabited*.41
Thereafter, the succeeding Goswamls and their followers began buying
land in village Dosaich and its surrounding hamlets, numerous records of
which are preserved for us either in the original or early copies in Persian
as well as Braj.42 Alongside this process of land acquisition there was a

    37 Ja‘far Saljuqi’s parwdna, M.M. Coll.
    38 The date of this event is fixed by a parwdna dated 28 March 1695, which
still puts Mathura in sarkdr Agra (NAI-2671/15) and a document of 12 May
1696, which assigns pargana Kaman to sarkdr Islamabad (Mathura).
    39 See Aziza Hasan, ‘Mints of the Mughal Empire’, PIHC, 29th session (1968,
Patiala), p. 331 (Table A).
    40 For this ‘creation’ of Vrindavan, see the remarks of Shrivatsa Goswami in
Margaret H. Case ed., Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, New Delhi, 1996,
pp. 269—70.
    41 G.D. (Persian).
    42 See the calendar of these documents annexed to Tarapada Mukherjee and
Irfan Habib, ‘Land Rights in the Reign of Akbar: the Evidence of the Sale Deeds
of Vrindavan and Arith’ PIHC, 50th session (1989-90, Gorakhpur), pp. 249—54
(Chapter 6 in this volume).
26                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

spate of temple construction, which began to put even Mathura into the
shade. This is revealed by an official survey of the temples of Mathura and
its environs undertaken in 1598 with a view to establishing which temples
deserved imperial grants of land. The work was carried out by Abu 1 Fazl
with the help of four (named) pandits, and their recommendations, as
approved by Emperor Akbar, were set forth in a singular Jarman issued on
11 September 1598. Of the 35 temples now recommended for assistance
only 6 were situated in Mathura, compared to 18 in village Dosaich and its
vicinity (i.e. Vrindavan). Pargana Sahar accounted for a further 8, pargana
Mangotla, 8, and pargana Hodal, l.43
    Settlements grew around the temples at Vrindavan, and agricultural
land was progressively converted into habitational area. This process we
can see not only in sale-deeds, but also in the rising prices of land under
cultivation (ziraatl, zarj) in the vicinity of the township. Table 1.2
shows prices in Rupees per bigha at which waste and cultivated land was
purchased at and around Vrindavan in various years (transactions of less
than one bigha of land have been ignored).
    One would expect prices to vary with the precise situation of the land
sold, which may explain the very high price (relative to the previous years)
paid in two transactions, one in 1595 and the other in 1715. But generally,
a rise in land prices as the township grew seems well established from the
table.
    This growth meant that buyers of land plots needed to have increasingly
larger financial resources. Jahangir, who visited the temple-town in 1619,
said the temples were built in Akbar’s time by Rajput nobles after their
own style with decorated exteriors.44 The ruler of Amber Raja Man
Singhs patronage of the Govind-dev temple and its priests, continued by
his successors, is otherwise well established.45 Then, there were imperial
Mughal land-grants conferred under Akbar and Jahangir and maintained
under their successors.46 The Vrindavan documents definitively show that


   43 Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘Akbar and the Temples of Mathura
and its Environs’, PIHC, 48th session (1987, Goa), pp. 234-50 (Chapter 3 in this
volume), for an analysis of this farman. The original farman is in the National
Archives of India and a copy in G.D. Coll., and another in M.M. Coll., 2.
   44 Tuzuk-i Jahdngiri, ed. Sayyid Ahmad, Aligarh, 1863-4, p. 279.
   45 See papers by R. Nath, Monica Horstmann, Gopal Narayan Bahura and
Catherine Asher in Case ed., Dialgoue in Stone, pp. 161-230.
   46 See Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘Akbar and the Temples of
Mathura and its Environs’, op. cit. (Chapter 3 in this volume); and idem, ‘The
Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan during the Reigns of
                            Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                        27

                      TABLE 1.2. Cost of Land in Vrindavan

 Year       Rate      Quoted/Deduced      Source
          (in Rs.)
 1569       5.70     Rate calculated      C.U.
 1572       2.71     -do-                 RD 145 [bigha fig. for area corrected]
 1594       2.75     Rate given           IVS, 208
 1595       4.00     -do-                 IVS, 210
 1595      14.40     Rate calculated      IVS 209 AB
 1595       8.24     -do-                 IVS 180 A&B
 1611      12.35     -do-                 NAI 2691/1
 1653      17.00     Rate given           Wright 11; GD39
 1654      13.33     Rate calculated      G.D.
 1702     20.36      -do-                 C.U.
 1706     21.58      -do-                 C.U.
 1715     87.00      -do-                 MM 51


all existing grants to Vrindavan temples and priests were honoured under
Aurangzeb (1659-1707) as well. In 1704, as we have seen, the Governor
of Agra ordered an annual payment of one rupee from each village in the
eighteen parganas of Braj Bhum to Brajanand, the presumed head of the
Chaitanya sect at Vrindavan.47
    Finally, there were the gifts of pilgrims and devotees. It was probably
an important moment when by zfarman of 1568 Akbar ordered that Jiv
Gusa’in should have the management (adhikar) of Madan Mohan and
Govind-dev temples and receive, ‘without any co-sharer’, the offerings
(khairat) at the temples.48 In a parwdna of 1718, Mahyar Khan, the faujdar
of Mathura, noted that ‘people who come there (to Vrindavan) and natives
of other provinces give or send money by way of offerings for all the
Bairagis resident there’, but complained that the income was cornered by
a small set of persons.49



Jahangir and Shahjahan’, PIHC, 49th session (1988, Dharwad), pp. 287-300
(Chapter 4 in this volume).
   47 Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna (G.D.); and a declaration (post-1710) of
zamindars, etc., of these parganas, also in G.D. Collection.
   48 VRI, Acc. No. 1.
   49 Parwdna dated 5 Safar 7 RY Farrukhsiyar (C.U.).
28                       Braj Bhiim in Mughal Times

    From these various sources of income much prosperity came the way
 of the Goswamis. When in 1710 Gobind Charan, head of the line of Rup
 Goswami, wished to transfer all his properties and effects to his designated
successor, his nephew and adopted son, Jagannath, an impressive list of
his possessions was drawn up. Besides a large store of ornaments, utensils
and cloth, he possessed 5 cows, 10 buffaloes, 15 bullocks, a horse and a
camel, one carriage, and one cart. He had a haveli and ten kunjs (retreats
or cottages set amidst groves) in Kaman, with two others in places nearby,
along with a garden with two wells; one haveli (house) and two shops in
Mathura; three havelis, eleven retreats (kunj), four gardens, four plots of
land, including one which was under cultivation, at Vrindavan; two tanks
and three retreats at Arith (Radhakund); a garden with haveli and well at
Barsana; three bavells in three other villages; one haveli at Amber, another
nearby, where he also possessed a garden with four wells; and, finally, a
garden at Sanganer about 15 km. SSW of Amber.50 There are names of
persons entered under various houses and retreats, some of whom could
have been his tenants. That the Goswamis often let out houses to rent is
shown by the actual judgement of the qdzi of Mathura, given in 1675 in
the plaint of Gobind Charan’s predecessor, Seoram Gosa’in, that he had
let out a haveli of his at Mathura to one Arjun, who now refused to pay
him rent.51 The Goswamis thus must have constantly been adding further
income from their investments in land and buildings.
   While these worldly activities of the Goswamis were doubtless a factor
in the growth of the township of Vrindavan, the basic source of its growth
remained the places character as a religious centre of the Chaitanya sect. In
time, however, followers of other sects appeared, with whom the relations
of the Chaitanya sect were by no means always cordial. In Mathura in 1654,
Gauranga Bangall, who owed allegiance to "Kishan Chaitan’ (Chaitanya),
complained to the local Mughal official that a Radha Ballabhl named
Damodar Das had seized a tree under which Lord Chaitanya used to sit.
A compromise was thereupon affected.52 By 1718, according to Mahyar
Khan’s parwana, there were now at Vrindavan besides the ‘Gaudiyas’ or


    50 G.D. Coll., original. A near-contemporary copy is also extant, same Coll.
 In this document an interesting distinction is made between kunj and haveli, in
that while the number in the case of kunj is indicated by the word qat'a (plot),
that of haveli is indicated by the word manzil (building), indicating in other
words that the kunj was essentially a grove containing a hut or cottage,
    51 NAI-2671/13.
    52 Vrindavan Docs., C.U. The official entertaining the complaint was Shaikh
‘Abdu’n NabI, then faujdar of Mathura.
                           Braj Bbiim in Mughal Times                              29

followers of Chaitanya, mendicants of other sects as well who received
offerings from pilgrims there, namely, the Radha-vallabhis, the Haridasis,
and the Ramanandls.53
   What then, did this township look like? Unfortunately, the historian
Bhimsen, who visited it in 1697-8 and was greatly impressed by it, left no
further description of the town.54 Slightly less brief are the notes 1‘timad
‘All Khan left of the two visits he paid to Vrindavan as a tourist in 1718.
He remarked on its large Brahman population and admired the gardens
that the Hindus had laid out in the town, along what ‘in Hindvi* was
called Kunj-Gall (‘grove-lane’)- He adds that the town was infested by
red-[faced] monkeys, whom visitors used to feed with gram?5 Finally,
MurtazaBilgrami, the author ofHadiqatul Aqdlim, recalling his boyhood
visit to the place in 1730-31, gives us this picture of Vrindavan:

Brindaban is a place with handsome and well-adorned buildings. There is a small
bazaar: it has twenty or fifteen shops of grain-sellers, betel-leaf and flower sellers,
etc. Mostly it is the Hindu mendicants of much attainment who live in the
retreats of Brindaban. A few Muslim faqirs live in cells. It is said that it. was the
place where Krishna had his sports. Men and women of that place are very
handsome. Whoever observes them will have his carnal love or spiritual devotion
greatly intensified according to his capacity.

   He goes on to speak enthusiastically of the concourse of young men and
women in the evenings, indulging in music, laughter, and games with each
other, and returning to their homes after nightfall with lighted candles.
‘They call these assemblagesgyangudri, he says.56 Gyan Gudri is the name
of a large quarter of Vrindavan close to the Yamuna’s banks.


    53 Parwana, 5 Safar 7 ry Farrukhs Iyar (C.U.). The Radhavallabhis and
Ramanandls are well-known sects. For Haridasis see Growse, District Memoir,
pp. 217-30. The Vallabhis, followers of Vallabhacharya, had their main seat at
Gokul, and so were not apparently present in any numbers at Vrindavan.
    54 Bhimsen, Nuskha-i Dilkusha, Br. Lib., Or. 23, f. 127a.
    55 I‘timad ‘All Khan, MiPatu’l Haqaiq, MS Bodl. Fraser 174. ff. 132b,
138b-139a. ‘Kunj Gali’ is the name of a quarter of Vrindavan (Growse, Mathura:
a District Memoir, p. 271). It is mentioned in an early sale-deed, both in its Braj
version of 1558 (Wright 3) and Persian, of 1569 (RD 13= VRI, SI. No. 56, Acc.
No. 13), the latter definitely referring to vill. ‘Bindraban’. The area around Kunj-
gali could thus well have formed the original nucleus of Vrindavan.
    56 Murtaza Husain Allahyar Bilgrami, Hadiqatu’l Aqaltm, litho. Nawal
Kishore, Lucknow, 1879, pp. 170-1. The author was writing in 1782. Gyan-gudri
literally means the garb of the mendicant, ‘friar’s rags’ (Fallons Dictionary, s.v.
 30                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Merchants and Moneylending

 One class on which our documents shed very little light is that of the
 merchants. However, it was from their ranks that some substantive gifts
were received by the Gosa’ins, from which one may infer the degree
 of prosperity of the class. Kanho, wife of Kaitam, mahajan (banker),
 donated a haveli and a shop in Toda Bhiwan (Bhim) to the Govind-dev
 temple in 1711.57 In 1719 Manoharl, wife of Lakhu, Khandelwal Banya
 (baqqat), and her daughter made a gift of a large pucca house at Kaman
 to the Govind-dev temple and its chief priest, Jagannath (NAI-2691/10).
 In 1725, Raja Ram, sdhukdr (banker) from Bengal, gifted two kunjs in
Vrindavan to Ram Jiwan Gosa’in of the Gopinath temple (IVS 205). In
 1760, Bishan Kunwar, widow of Bengali Rai Agarwal, mahajan, resident
of Delhi, gifted a brick-and-stone haveli, wooden-roofed, with a grove and
pucca well, aL Vrindavan, to Ram Saran, priest of the Govind-dev temple
 (NAI-2671/26).
    We do not learn much about commercial activities from our records. The
sole document relating to the hundis, or bills of exchange, is a statement
of 1680 by one Sherdil, mansabdar (rank-holding officer) to the effect that
he had held a hundi for Rs.43Vi, drawn by Bans! and Manohardas Sahu,
which he had now sold to Bansidhar Jhokan in Mathura (IVS 174).
    Those with financial resources also engaged in a number ofmoneylending
activities that belie assumptions like those of Vera Anstey that in pre­
colonial times 'the power to borrow was strictly limited by the political,
economic and legal lack of security, and land could be hardly considered to
offer security for a loan’.58 In 1728 Kishan Charan, adhikdri of the Madan
Mohan temple, advanced a loan of Rs.30 to two muqaddams and two
ordinary peasants against the security (gahnat) of three bighas of dressed
fields (kyart pdtrivdrl), surrounded by agricultural land, presumably in



gyan-gudrt). It could not refer to the evening assemblage but was the name of
the ground where the people assembled. The name is, in fact, borne by a large
quarter of the town of Vrindavan by the side of the river Yamuna, not far from
the Govind-dev temple (see Survey of India’s Guide Map of Mathura and
Vrindavan; also Growse, op. cit., p. 271). This is where the concourse presumably
used to be held when Bilgrami visited the town.
   57 Cf Mirza Raja Bijai Singhs parwdna in M. Horstmann, In Favour of
Govind-dev Ji, pp. 208-11, facsimile, p. 329.
   58 Vera Anstey, The Economic Development ofIndia, 4th edn., London, 1952,
p. 186.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                           31

Vrindavan (Wright 22),59 The interest charged was to amount to a taka to
a rupee (taka rupiya ko bydj), presumably per month, a rate we cannot now
establish because we do not know how may takas (copper coins) went to
a rupee at the time. Two successive Braj documents, one of 9 June 1743
(Wright 31) and the other of a month or more later (Wright 32) show
that for receiving Rs. 132 from Ram Kishor, adhikari of Madan Mohan,
six named jimidars (zamtnddrs) mortgaged their garden, held to be worth
Rs.137, which was handed over to the lender when the latter amount was
not paid back by the borrowers.6061 This would imply a rate of interest of
3.79 per cent per month (i.e. 45.45 per cent a year at the simple rate) based
on the value assigned to the mortgaged garden.
    There are three documents which concern loans advanced against the
security of urban property. All three come from the Gopinath temple
archives. In one (IVS 173), dated 18 January 1720, one Gujar Mai of the
S rim al caste, resident of Delhi, mortgaged two shops in Agra that he
owned against a loan of Rs.30 from one Moti Lal s/o Manak Chand,
the rent to be collected by the lender in lieu of interest. In a document
of 1756-7 (probably 12 April 1757) one Udai Ram Das6' took a loan of
Rs.3,000 from Rao Rup Ram at the monthly rate of Re.0.75 (12 annas)
per cent per month (i.e. 9 per cent per annum at the simple rate) on the
security of two rectangular kunjs in Vrindavan (IVS 148A-B). Though
the bond comes from the Gopinath temple archives, it is not clear how
any priest of that temple was involved in the transaction. The rate of
interest seems moderate, but possibly the lender also claimed the rent due
from the mortgaged property until the amount lent was returned. Finally,
we have a late document of 13 September 1772, in which one Sobha
Chand, Brahman, of Gujarat, records his acknowledgement of a loan of
Rs.25 from Gosa in Bindraban Das (adhikari?) of the Gopinath temple,
mortgaging his house (haveli) in the Mandvl Rani quarter of Mathura
with a fixed interest rate of 2 per cent per month (i.e. 24 per cent per
annum at the simple rate), which he was to pay monthly until he also
repaid the principal (IVS 197).



   59 The document in Braj has been deciphered and translated by Professor
Wright, but my reading differs from his in some places.
   60 Also deciphered and translated by Professor Wright. I, however, cannot find
the reference to compound interest that he sees in one phrase.
   61 Udai Ram Das appears in another document from the Gopinath temple
(IVS 151), dated vs 1814 (ad 1757-8) in which after purchasing a mare from the
Gopinath temple, he pledges himself to pay the price (Rs.60) within a month.
32                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   As these details show, moneylending was carried out not only by
professional bankers and usurers but also by other rich men. This seems
to bear out what Francisco Pelsaert noted in 1626 in respect of Agra, next
door to Mathura:

In Agra the men who are richest live mainly by money-lending, a practice which
is not discreditable to Hindus, but only to Moslems (though they do it commonly
enough).62



Administration

 Most of the Persian documents in the Vrindavan collections are related
 directly and indirectly to the conduct of the Mughal administration, a fact
 which has led Shireen Moosvi to argue in favour of the depth of control
 that the Mughal state apparatus possessed even in rural localities.63 In any
 case, we have here names of various officials by which we can establish
 who was serving in what position at what time, especially at Mathura,
 headquarters of the pargana, within whose limits Vrindavan was situated.
    The most powerful officer the Gosa’ins or Goswamis ofVrindavan usually
 dealt with was the noble in whose jagir Mathura lay at that particular time.
 These jagjrdars and their subordinates were birds of passage, so to speak,
 since their jdgirs were held on a temporary basis only. The names of eleven
jagirdars of Mathura, successively holding the assignment, during the reign
 of Shahjahan (1628-58) appear in the Vrindavan documents, giving an
 average term of 2.7 years for each.64 The jagirdar, besides his entitlement
 to collect the land tax and other imposts, was usually responsible for
 settling local complaints and fulfilling some police obligations. We may as
 an illustration take the proceedings in a dispute over buildings and land in
 Vrindavan between Gobind Charan Gosa in and Kishan Priya, the widow
 of Braj Kunwar Gosa’in. In 1705 Mukhtar Khan, who along with holding
 the office of Governor of Agra was apparently also thejagjrdar of Mathura,
 issued a parwana to his agent at Mathura, Mir Madan, in favour of Gobind
 Charan’s claims (G.D. Persian). At the same time, Raja Jai Singh of Amber


    62 Francisco Pelsaert, Jahangir’s India: The Remonstrantie ofFrancisco Pelsaert,
tr. W.H. Moreland and P. Geyl, Cambridge, 1925, pp. 28-29.
    63 Shireen Moosvi, ‘Mughal Administration in Rural Localities’, Studies in
Peoples History, vol. 1 (2), 2014, pp. 231—36.
    64 C£ Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘The Mughal Administration and
the Temples ofVrindavan, etc,,’ op. cit., p. 292 (Chapter 4 in this volume).
                         Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                           33

(who held the position of patron of the Govind-dev temple) sent parwdnas
to officials at Mathura, also urging Gobind Charan’s claims. These officials
were the faujdar (commandant) Mirza Bahram Beg; Sayyid Sultan, the
waqa i nigar (news reporter, an appointee of the Bakhshi-u’l Mamalik,
an imperial minister); and Mir Madan, the jdgirddrs agent. The task of
implementing these orders fell to thefaujdar, who sent a mounted soldier
and four footmen to enforce them. When owing to Kishan Priyas spirited
defiance they failed to achieve their purpose, Gobind Charan’s partisans
insisted that the true state of affairs be put into the waqd’T (report of the
waqd’i-nigar}y 'so that there may be no need for further enquiry’.65 The
dispute, as one may expect, lingered on for a long time, though ultimately
Gobind Charan had some success.66
     Another official with whom the Goswamis had much to do was the qdzi
of Mathura (as was so at other pargana headquarters,, such as Sahar). First,
he did duty as a registrar, so that unless a text of agreement, sale, gift, etc.,
 or a copy thereof, was authenticated by the qdzi, it could not be considered
a reliable piece of evidence. For this reason, many papers written in Braj
were subsequently reinforced with Persian versions and in that form
 authenticated by the qazi, as we can see in the case of a number of sale
 deeds in the Vrindavan Collections. Second, the qdzi also decided disputes
 over property, for which purpose the Goswamis had regular recourse to
 his court at Mathura. We have already referred to the qdzi Muhammad
 ‘Arif’s judgement in favour of Seo Ram Gusa’in against his tenant
 Arjun in 1675. An interesting judgement was delivered by his successor
 Qutbuddm, on 28 February 1706, upholding the claims of Gobind Charan
 Gusa’in to a haveli and two shops in Mathura which he had received by
 hiba (gift) from Kishan Charan, as against the claims of the officials of the
 Baitu’l Mdl, or Public Treasury, who were appropriating the rents from
 the three premises on the ground apparently that Kishan Charan had died
  intestate. In his decision the qdzi had the support of Izid Bakhsh ‘Rasa,
 then the head of the Bayutat (Property and Household) Department of
  the Province of Agra, who issued a parwana in favour of Gobind Charan
  on 2 February 1706.67 Below the formal text of his parwana Izid Bakhsh


   65 G.D. Coll, dated 7 Safar 49 ry Aurangzeb. The signatories to this report
include Muhammad Faqir (with seal), the thanadar, presumably of Vrindavan.
   66 See entry ‘Kishan Priya’ in Irfan Habib, ‘A Documentary History of the
Gosa’ins ... at Vrindavan’ in Case, ed., Dialogue in Stone, pp. 146-7 (Chapter 10
in this volume).
   67 A copy of the qdzis judgement is extant (C.U.). It reproduces at the bottom
Izid Bakhsh’s parwdnaT the original of which has also survived (C.U.).
34                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 wrote in his own hand: ‘Let the officials act in accordance with what
 has been written. Let them so behave that no harm is inflicted on Gods
 people. Let them strictly obey this’.68 It is possible to see in this episode
 two contrasting aspects of Mughal administration, namely, arbitrariness
 and some spirit of compassion.
     It is possible that as a group well supported by imperial grants69 and
 patronized by the Amber rulers, so uniformly loyal to the Mughals, the
 Vrindavan Goswamis should have been seeing more of the better side of
 the Mughal administration. When Aurangzeb had the temple of Keshav
 Rai at Mathura destroyed in January 1670, this caused much alarm at
 Vrindavan and Seo Ram Gusain departed from the town, carrying away
 the idols installed at the Govind-dev temple, which now left Vrindavan for
 ever.70 Yet our documents do not even distantly refer to any destruction or
 desecration affecting any of the major temples at Vrindavan. On the other
hand, in May 1671 during the middle of this period of alarm, Hasan ‘All
Khan, faujdar of Mathura, issued a parwdna directing that the 135 bighas
 of land held by the late Raja Jai Singh of Amber on behalf of the Govind-
dev temple, etc., under imperial Jarmans, should be maintained as per
status quo and no interference therein should occur.71 In fact, as we noted
earlier, all the previous grants to Vrindavan temples and priests continued
to be maintained and confirmed during the reign of Aurangzeb. Seo Ram
himself returned in 1675 and set about looking after his properties in
Mathura and Vrindavan.72
    One needs, however, to remind oneself here that any measure of
relief from the administration did not usually come free of charge. It is
not a matter on which one would expect formal documents to be frank
and forthcoming. Nonetheless, in a draft text for endorsement by local
notables, c.1718, Gosain Gopi Raman of Vrindavan lets it out that much
‘substantial money’ (zar-i-kulli) had to be spent to win over the amin
(finance comptroller) of a princess and to get the Imperial court to favour
his cause, so as to protect his rights against the pretensions of one Kunj
Das (RD-30). In January 1725, Gopt Raman himself gave a qdzi-certified
promissory note to one Qazi Nur Muhammad for payment of Rs.30
towards his services in obtaining official confirmation of a land-grant of

   68 These remarks appear only in the original, not in the text of the parwana
copied in the qazi's judgement.
   69 For these grants see Chapters 3 and 4 of this volume.
   70 NAI-2671/12 and 2671/13.
   71 G.D. Coll.
   72 NAI-2671/13.
                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                         35

50 bighas (VRI, Sr. No. 53, Acc. No. 9). One can speculate as to how much
sheer bribery accounted for a large part of these costs.
    One fresh source of trouble for the Goswamis was undoubtedly the
Jat uprising of the early 1690s. In 1692, a new demarcation document
(chaknama) had to be drawn up for an imperial grant held by Gosa in
Das, because of his claim that ‘the cbakndma of the grant had been lost
among the goods plundered during the times of disturbance raised by the
accursed Jats’.73 Krishan Charan, the successor of Seo Ram, whom we met
earlier, narrated in 1694 that he had to leave behind his properties and
‘flee to the Rajput country owing to the disturbance raised by the Jats’.74
However, except for this period of rebellion and unrest in the early 1690s,
life in Vrindavan, and apparently Braj Bhum as a whole, seems to have
followed a course of sedate calm till well into the reign of Muhammad
Shah (1719-48) J5


People

Ordinary people appear in our documents usually only when they had
something to do with the Gosa’ins’ land transactions. Peasants appear as
sellers of land, and we can glimpse something of the working of the village
‘community’ from the information provided by sale deeds. It is left to
other materials to provide us with some notion of the burdens the peasants
bore, the primary one being that of land-revenue. The A’in-i Akbarts tax­
schedules (dasturs) for the Braj Bhum territory, as for other areas, show
a very high level of tax burden considering the prices prevailing at the
time: the clear aim was the appropriation of the maximum share possible
of the peasants surplus.76 This could not take place without considerable
repression. In December 1631, Mundy visited Koi, the headquarters of
one of the Doab parganas which Mukhtar Khan included within Braj
Bhum in his parwana of 1704. ‘Here’, says Mundy, ‘nowe are in this Castle
about 200 of them [peasants] prisoners because they cannot pay the Tax
imposed on them, which heretofore was paid when their Corne was sold;


   73 R.K.158.
   74 NAI-2671/14.
   75 Perhaps this is too sweeping a judgement! See Girish Chandra Dwivedi,
The Jats: Their Role in the Mughal Empire, New Delhi, 1989; R.P. Rana, Rebels
and Rulers', The Rise ofJat Power in Medieval India c.1665-1735, New Delhi,
2006, esp. pp. 142—81; and Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd edn., pp. 390-95.
   76 Cf. Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd edn., pp. 230-59.
36                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

but now they mist pay for it in the ground’.77 Given the nature of the
Vrindavan documents it is curious that they make no reference, direct or
indirect, to the jzya, or poll-tax, on non-Muslims, which represented
a substantial addtion to rural and urban taxation. Its imposition was
decreed by Aurargzeb in 1679, and was later abolished by Farrukhsiyar
in 1713 through a simple order.78 One is left to wonder whether this
total silence on jisya is due to the fact that the Vrindavan gosa ins, being
technically mendfcants (fuqara), were exempt from that onerous tax.
   Fiscal oppression apart, that daily life was hard for the poor was noted
by the observant franc is co Pelsaert, writing about Agra and its surrounding
region in or about 1626. He offers this description of the life of‘workmen’
at Agra: they hac 'kbichri, made of green pulse mixed with rice, cooked
with water’ as thdr food. Their huts were ‘built of mud with thatched
roofs’. Of furniture there was ‘little or none except some earthenware pots’
and two beds for the man and wife, the scanty bed-cloths leaving them
exposed to bitter cold in winter. Some relief from cold was secured only
from cow dung fires.79 This could serve as a description of the conditions
of poor people throughout Braj Bhum.
    Setting aside .amines, any of which (such as the one in 1554-6)
could have carriel away large parts of the population,80 there was the
scourge of diseast. Out of the 25 villagers whose personal descriptions
are recorded in tie extant papers authenticated by qdzis of Mathura and
Sahar during the period 1653-1717, as many as ten bore the marks of
smallpox, a propcrtion of 40 per cent.81 If one takes into account all the
persons whose appearance is recorded in huliyas in documents whether of
qazis courts or others, belonging to Vrindavan (mostly), Mathura, and
Arith, between 1453 and 1737, after adjusting the figure for the number
of persons whose huliya is recorded more than once, as many as 43 out of
96, or 44.8 per ceit, are reported to have borne the marks of smallpox. It
is surely curious that the number of those affected by smallpox seems to
have grown over time. Among the 48 persons whose huliyas were recorded
during the period 1653-1717, the number bearing marks of smallpox is
only 15, but amo^g the next 48 physical descriptions recorded between


   77 Peter Mundy, Travels, ed. R.C. Temple, London, 1914, vol. II, pp. 73-4.
      For information on jizya under Aurangzeb see Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd
edn., pp. 285-7 &      jts abolition in 1713 is shortly mentioned in Hadi Kamwar
Khan, Tazkiratu’s S^latln-i Chaghatd, ed. Muzaffar Alam, Bombay, 1980, p. 173.
   75 Plesaert, Jahangir’$ India, op. cit., pp. 60-1.
   80 Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd edn., p. 113.
   81 Ibid., p. Ill 2nd n.
                          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                      37

1722 and 1737 the number rises to 28, nearly double. Does this mean that
smallpox was on the increase in the area in the late seventeenth century?
Or merely that pockmarks were not observed carefully enough earlier?
Were we to accept the latter explanation, this would mean that over the
total period as many as over 58 per cent of adults could have suffered
from an attack of smallpox at some point in their lives, though we still
do not know the extent of mortality the disease caused, which must have
been correspondingly high. Plague too visited the region in 1615-6, and
Jahangir has left us an account of the heavy mortality it caused in the area
around Agra.82
   From our documents we learn much about the extent of illiteracy. In
the gwzf-certified documents ordinary persons simply affix a mark. Not
a single peasant, the panch included, seems to have known how to write,
if we judge by their manifest failure to sign their names in the numerous
surviving deeds of land-sale or other legal documents. The only exception
appears to be offered by a bilingual document of 1654 where All Khan,
son of Angad, a peasant of Vrindavan, was able to write ‘All’ in Nagari,
followed by an abbreviation das (for dastkhat) also in Nagari (GD=Wright
12). He probably did not know how to write ‘Khan’ to complete his name!
The same conditions prevailed apparently among ordinary townsmen.
When in May 1705 a report was drawn up on the failure of a horseman and
four foot soldiers to evict Kishan Priya from the premises she occupied at
Vrindavan, and the five troopers had to endorse the report, Shaikh Farid,
the horseman, did not even know how to put the mark, and only Arjun
Singh, a companion of his, put a geometric figure as a mark apparently
on behalf of them both. Daddhram, one of the foot soldiers, put a cross.83
The other footmen probably could not even hold a pen to make a mark.
Not many, then, could really have attained literacy, let alone education,
under the banyan tree.


Relations among Communities

When we turn from what our evidence tells us about the misery of
disease and extent of illiteracy in Braj Bhum to the light it throws on
intercommunal relations, we at least encounter a far less depressing scene.
History undoubtedly records some acts of religious intolerance committed
in Mughal times; but it also presents a contrary picture. In the Vrindavan

  82 Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, op, cit., pp. 161-2.
  83 G.D. Coll. (Persian).
38                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

documents it is the contrary picture that is incontestably more visible.
    In contrast to Aurangzeb’s destruction of the great Keshav Rai temple
of Mathura in 1670, we have evidence of the generous grants to temples
and their priests in the Braj region under Akbar (Chapter 3), and his
successor Jahangir (Chapter 4), If Shahjahan was less generous over new
grants, the farman he issued in 1634 to protect the sounding of the gong
in the Madan Mohan temple, Vrindavan, is surely a memorable text: it
expressly describes the ritual performed in the temple as ‘worship of God’
('ibadat-i-Ilahl) (MM-61), a recognition inconceivable for a Muslim of
even moderately orthodox views to give voice to. It is also important to
remind ourselves that even under Aurangzeb, all the grants to temples
and priests at Vrindavan and elsewhere in the Braj region continued to be
honoured, as noted earlier (see also Chapter 5). The unprecedented official
provision of income for the Gosa’ins through a levy on all the villages of
the eighteen purganas of Braj Bhum from 1704 onwards, also belongs to a
late phase in the same reign.
    Later, when some time in or before 1726-7, Subal Das, chief priest of
the Madan Mohan temple at Vrindavan, was writing to ‘Inayatullah Khan,
now a minister, but earlier a secretary of Aurangzeb, to seek from him
confirmation of an imperial land-grant held by that temple, Subal Das
must have felt that the following words would strike the right chord with
that high official: ‘Whatever favour is shown to the temple (devala) comes,
after all, from God—-jazdk Allah (Arabic for “May God reward thee”)!’84
   A similar commingling of religious idioms is found in a rare private
letter in Persian that has also survived among the Vrindavan documents.
Written by an avowed devotee of Jiv Gosa’in and addressed to one Mehta
Sitaldas, in or before 1658, it has the Arabic invocation Allahu Akbar at
the top, while ‘Ram Ram’ is recited in salutation to the addressee in the
main text (RD-96).
   Jiv Goswami himself, the celebrated head of the Chaitanya sect of
Vrindavan, benefited from the assistance of‘All Khan, thakur and chaudhurl
of Sei, a village fairly distant from Vrindavan, who transferred to Jiv (in
1558) the land he had himself purchased at the latter place, without any
apparent gain to himself (see above and Chapter 6). The attitude of ease
of dealings among Hindus and Muslims at the time is also shown by the
fact that there are four Muslim signatures in Persian on the deed of gift
of a temple (devala) by Gopinath, wine-seller, at Vrindavan in December
1600, heading a number of signatures in Hindi (IVS-216),


     84 Vrindavan Docs. No. 167
                           Braj Bhum in Mughal Times                             39

    As Mukhtar Khan, Governor of the Agra province, noted in 1704,
the Chaitanya Gosains fed whomever from among ‘Hindu and Muslim
mendicants (fitqara) arrives hungry’ (GD). In 1739, when Rai Udai Singh,
who apparently held Sambhar salt beds in his jagjr, allotted 500 mans
(maunds) of salt as an annual gift to Ram Saran, chief priest of the Govind-
dev temple, he cited the fact that the grantee ‘endeavoured to feed [both]
Hindus and Muslims’ (NAI-2671/23) as a primary reason for the grant.
    In the numerous land transactions of the Gosa’ins, Muslim headmen
and peasants appear as both sellers and witnesses. We have seen how three
of them, Nizam, Humaun, and Nasso, appear as sellers among the thirteen
panch in Dosaich (Vrindavan) in 1594 and two of them among seven, now
styled zamindars, in 1601. They must have been converts, as there are no
Muslims among the panch of Vrindavan in the earlier records. As we have
already suggested, such also must have been the case with Bari Khan, who
appears as the head of the panch of village Arith in 1641 = The practice of
naming an individual’s father (and often grandfather as well) to establish
his identity in legal and semi-legal documents seems to have become a
more regularly used method from about the middle of the seventeenth
century; and this helps us to identify converts more easily. Thus ‘All Khan
of Vrindavan, ‘son of Angad, son ofRaghu Gaurua’, so described in 1654,
was an obvious convert; and yet he was acceptable as a surety to Seo Ram,
chief priest of the Govind-dev temple, when buying land from two Hindu
Gaurua peasants.85 There were reverse conversions to Hinduism as well, as
illustrated by the case of a namesake of ‘All Khan at the village of Arith
(Radhakund). It’s here in 1717, that one Har Rai, ‘son of Gulal, son of

    85 G.D. Collection, containing a Braj text (Wright 12) below the Persian
version bearing the Qazi’s seal. Apparently, ‘Ali Khan looked so much like his
Gaurua brethren that the scribe put the words Mutj‘ul Islam (Obedient-to-
Islam) before his name, although this phrase, if used, could only precede a non­
Muslim’s name, this being an impolite official banality.
    In our documents ‘Ali Khan first appears in the Braj text of a deed of sale (of
1648) by eleven named panch of Haidu (Vrindavan), in which at the end, he
affirms the text to be sahi (correct) (Wright 9). He witnessed (with eight others)
a sale-deed of 1650 (Wright 10) and (with nine others) one of 1653 (Wright 11).
In the deed of 1654, where he is the surety (kafil), his appearance (huliya) is
recorded: here he is said to be aged 50 years. In the Braj version (Wright 12), he
is represented as having signed (das = dastkhat) ‘All’ in Nagari. In 1659 he appears
among the headmen of Dosaich (Vrindavan), as a witness to the sale of land by
the panch of Nagla Nagu (Wright 13), and again as a witness to another land sale
in 1662 (Wright 14). His field (khet) is mentioned in a sale deed of 1650 as
marking the eastern boundary of a plot of land in Vrindavan (Wright 10).
40                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

‘All Khan’, along with Ranjit, son of Jagannath, sells a small garden to
Gosa’in Jagannath, and appears to effect the transaction at the court of the
local qazi. He or his father (for Gulal is a name a Muslim might also bear)
must have reverted to their ancestral faith; yet this act of ‘apostasy’ seems
of no significance to the         who simply had the particulars recorded
routinely.86 In Vrindavan, Junaid, a Muslim peasant, had two sons who
bore Hindu names (see page 158 below). There was thus a surprisingly
casual acceptance of the changing of one’s religion, whether to Islam or
Hinduism, which seemed to affect neither ones caste (at least, if one was
a Gaurua) nor one’s legal or even social status.
    Shared poverty also perhaps removed barriers. In 1732 at Mathura
when three Hindu women, viz., Dayali and her two daughters-in-law,
all of them apparently widows, wished to sell away their small piece of
land containing the remains of a ruined hut or cottage (jamla), they had
to offer two sureties (zamin). The first one that they could produce was
a humble 61-year old Muslim cotton-carder (naddaf), Ghasi, son of Taj,
son of‘Alam. And his word was duly accepted by the buyer, Ram Saran,
the future chief priest of the Govind-dev temple.87




    86 NAI-2691/11 (original); copy in G.D. In 1722 the same Har Rai and his
brother Raja Ram (‘sons of Kolal [or Golal]’) joined six other Hindu land-owners
(zamindars) to donate 4 blghas of land in village Arith to Gosa’in Subal Das,
adhikarl of Madan Mohan Temple (Vrindavan) by way of pun-arth (M.M. 82).
    87 G.D. The other person standing surety on behalf of the three widows was
Gujar, son of Ganga Ram, pockmarked, 58 years old, profession not indicated.
Ghasi, the Muslim, also acted as a witness, but by making a mark, not being
literate.
                             CHAPTER 2



          Notes on the Economic and
          Ethnographic Geography of
          Braj Bhum in Mughal Times
                     Irfan Habib and Faiz Habib




Chapter 1 offered a general survey of Braj Bhum in Mughal times,
adopting for its territory the group of parganas which in 1704, according
to a declaration of the Governor of the suba (province) of Agra, constituted
Braj Bhum. For this territory we have considerable statistical and
ethnographic information, tabulated pargana-wise, in the A?in-i Akbari
(c. 1595) of Abu’l Fazl. The information was surveyed on the basis of
research already carried out, notably by S. Moosvi; but on reflection it has
been felt that there still remains some room for a second round of analysis
of the data the A’in-i Akbari provides us with.
    Before we undertake the task, let us remind ourselves of the changes that
had taken place in the territorial demarcation of internal administrative
units between the time of the A’in-i Akbari and 1704, when the territory
of Braj Bhum came to be officially defined. All the eighteen parganas.,
listed in 1704 as belonging to Braj Bhum, were situated within the suba
or province of Agra, but for two belonging to the suba of Delhi. The
parganas in Mughal times were grouped under sarkdrs (a number of which
formed a suba). Thus until 1696 Mathura, Mangotla, Ol, Au (or Ao),
Mahaban (or Mahavan), and Jalesar belonged to the sarkdr of Agra; Sahar,
Kaman or Kama, Khoh or Koh Mujahid, Pahari, and Hodal, to sarkdr
Sahar; Khohri, to sarkdr Alwar; and Koi, Noh, Sa*dabad, and Anupnagar
to sarkdr Koi, all four sarkdrs lying within suba Agra. Palwal belonged to
the sarkdr of Delhi, and so was situated within the suba of Delhi. Of the
three new parganas, one apparently represented only a change of name,
42                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

as Faridabad had replaced Tilpat as pargana headquarters within sarkdr
Delhi, while the other two, Anupnagar and Sa‘dabad, were carved out of
territories of older parganas, to be placed within sarkdr Koi. These facts
are confirmed by a list of parganas of Mughal provinces, the portion of
which relating to suba Agra, at least, was compiled before 1696? This
floor date is established by the fact that the list still shows pargana Matura
(so spelt) as being within sarkdr Agra. The last reference in the Vrindavan
documents to Mathura as attached to sarkdr Agra belongs to 1695, while
from 1696 onwards Mathura (or Islamabad ‘urfMathura) begins to appear
as a separate sarkdr.123Recurring references in the Vrindavan documents
subsequent to 1695 show that the sarkdr of Sahar was now abolished,
and all its parganas had been transferred to sarkdr Mathura. Pargana
Mahaban, previously in sarkdr Agra, was also attached to the new sarkdr
of Mathura?
    The A’In-i Akbari supplies in its statistical tables, set out in the chapter
entitled Ahwal-i do-azdah suba (Account of the Twelve Provinces), much
information about the localities we are concerned with. The data relate
mainly to matters which were important from the official point of view.
Reading from right to left, after the name of the pargana, comes an entry
for qita or fort (where, in case it has one, it is indicated whether it is of
stone or brick); then drazl or measured area, given in bighas', next, naqdl
or jama1, which represented the estimated or assigned net annual revenue
in dams (40 dams going to a rupee); followed by the amount of jama*
alienated through suyurghdl or tax-free land-grants;4 and in the last three
columns, the zamlnddrs/bumls in the pargana, specified by qaum (caste or
clan) and the numbers of their retainers, horse and foot.

   1 These pargana lists are set out in a volume of miscellaneous papers in the
British Library (previously the British Museum), Add. 6586, ff. 73a-101b. The
tables run left to right, beginning with f. 101b, and cover the subas of Bihar,
Allahabad, Awadh, Agra, Delhi, Lahore, Ajmer and Ahmadabad (Gujarat). While
copied in the late eighteenth century, internal evidence places the original lists in
the late seventeenth century (see note 2).
   2 The last document mentioning Mathura as belonging to sarkdr Agra is
NAI-2671/15, dated 28 March 1695, while the two earliest documents,
mentioning the separate sarkdr of Islamabad-Mathura, are both dated 12 May
1696 (one in Govind-dev collection, the other of unknown provenance). The list
in Add. 6586, not only shows Mathura in sarkdr Agra, but also shows sarkdr
Sahar with its parganas duly listed (ff 89b, 92b).
   3 This is shown by a document of 27 April 1718 (IVS 157).
   4 On this see Shireen Moosvi, The Economy of the Mughal Empire, c.1595: A
Statistical Study, 2nd ed., New Delhi, 2015, pp. 157-62.
               Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography                 43

    Since H. Blochmann in his standard edition of the /Tin-i Akbari
dispensed with the columns and their headings, and H.S. Jarrett in
his translation restored the columns very eccentrically, altering their
arrangement and headings, it is desirable to set out the information, given
in the A’ins tables for the Braj Bhum parganas, strictly following the
original scheme (Table 2.1).5
    The influence of an official approach in the compilation of the A*in-i
Akbaris data is shown by the importance it gives to forts. Clearly, it was
of much use to the administration to know whether such a safe place
was available for the storage of money and material, and the residence of
officers and guards. Of the 16 parganas of Braj Bhum listed in the A in
forts are recorded, not surprisingly, in as many as eight.
    The measured area (drazi) statistics, which come next to the column
for forts in the A*ins tables, pose a puzzle that is hard to solve. One would
think that the area was measured by the Mughal administration mainly
for taxation purposes and so would correspond to ‘gross cropped area’
as recorded in the early Agricultural Statistics of British India, as W.H.
Moreland, indeed, argued.6 But once we compare the drazi figures of each
pargana with those of the revenue expected from it (jamaVnaqdi), which
is entered in the very next column, the enormous variations in the rates of
revenue per bigha of drazi that result show immediately that the measured
area must have included much unsown area besides the taxed area or the
area actually cultivated. We set out in Table 2.2 the jama7drazi ratios in
Braj Bhum parganas in terms of dams/bigha.
    Let us, first, consider a possible inference from these figures, viz., that
these ratios represent great variations in agricultural productivity affecting
the taxable capacities of the different localities. In order to test this
(rather unlikely) possibility, Table 2.2 presents the revenue rates (dasturs)
for three major rabi crops (wheat, gram, barley) and four kharif crops


    5 The information is taken from the tables in the Ain~i Akbari for sarkars of
Agra, Koi and Sahar in suba Agra, and sarkdr of Delhi in stiba Delhi. These are
set out in British Library MSS Add. 7652 and Add. 6552 in their original form;
and their readings, wherever identical, have been preferred by us in this table,
and elsewhere, to those of Blochmann s edition. In the area (drazi) figures that
we have reproduced, biswas (each equal to twentieth of a bigha) wherever given in
the A ’ins tables are omitted. In the Blochmann edition, 2 vols., Calcutta, 1867-7,
the data extracted for our table will be found in vol. I, pp. 442-44, 447, 455,
518-20.
    6 See W.H. Moreland, ‘The Agricultural Statistics of Akbar’s Empire’, Journal
of the U.P. Historical Society, Lucknow, vol. II (i), 1922, pp. 1-39.
                                  TABLE 2.1. Information in the A m-i Akbarl on Braj Bhum Parganas

 Pargana                  Fort             Measured   Jama7Naqdi      Suyurghdl           Zamindars           Horsemen    Foot­
                                             area        (dams)        (dams)                                            retainers
                                           (bighas)
 Mathura       Has fort of baked brick       37,347     11,55,807       69,770                _
 Sahar         Has fort                    3,85,895     24,89,816       21,278    Bachhal, Gujar, Jat,          200       7,000
                                                                                  Kachhwaha
Mangoda                   —                  74,974     11,45,030       79,655    Rajput, etc.                   20         400
01                        —                1,53,387     55,09,487       81,542    Rajput, Brahman               100       1,000
Au (Ao)                   —                2,03,505     10,30,848       36,879    Shaikhzadas                   100         500
Pahari                    —                1,06,422     12,28,999       26,045    Rahiu, Thathar                 20         700
Kaman                     —                  92,500      5,05,724        1,229    Meo, Jat, Ahir                 10         300
Koh Mujahid               —                 23,769       1,70,365           —     Meo, Jat                       —          200
Khohri                    —                2,20,508     43,59,272       96,919    Khiinzadas of Mewat           900       5,000
Noh            Has fort of baked brick     1,39,399     13,11,955       29,160    Rajput, Jat, Afghan           100       3,000
Modal                      —                 78,500      4,62,710       36,140    Jat, & c.                      10         200
Palwal         [Fort] built of baked       2,34,783     17,69,493     2,18,365    Rajput, Gujar                  25         500
               brick, upon a mound
Tilpat         [Fort] built of baked       1,19,578     30,77,913       92,583    Rajput, Brahman, Gujar         40         400
               brick
Mahavan        Has fort of baked brick     2,90,703    67,84,787      2,84,707    Say y ids, Brahmans, & c.     200       2,000
Jalesar        Has fort of baked brick     9,64,733    68,35,004      4,12,080    Gahlot, Suraj Bankra          400       5,000
Koi            Has brick fort              5,48,355   1,04,12,305     4,45,228    Chauhan, Jakhara              450      29,050
Note: Sadabad and Anupnagar did not exist as separate parganas at the time of theAm-i Akbarl
The name of the first^minddr caste shown against Paharl is ‘Rahiu’ in MSS, but ‘Meo’ in Blochmann’s ed.
              Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography                45

              TABLE 2.2. Rate of Dams ofJama‘ per Bigha of Arazi
                       (calculated from Table 2.1)

Pargana                Rate in dams     Pargana                Rate in dams
Mathura                    30.95        Khohri                      19.77
Sahar                       6.45        Noh                          9.41
Mangotla                   15.27        Hodal                        5.89
01                         35.92        Palwal                       7.54
Ao                          5.07        Tilpat                      25.74
Pahari                     11.55        Mahavan                     23.34
Kaman                       5.47        Jalesar                      7.08
Koh Mujahid                 7.17        Koi                         18.99

(sugarcane, rice, cotton, indigo), set out in the A’in-i Akbari itself for
various dastiir-cirdes, each comprising a single pargana or, more usually, a
set ofparganas. The table here reproduces the rates set for the Braj Bhum
localities.7
   These tax rates, being all set fairly close to each other, thus rule out any
substantial variations in agricultural productivity over the area—meaning
this cannot be the explanation of the wide variations in jama1-arazi ratios.
   It can also be seen from Table 2.3 that the jama'/drazi rates presented
in Table 2.2 are incredibly low in eight of the sixteen Braj Bhum parganas,
ranging from just over 5 dams to less than 10 dams per bigha. On the
other hand, the rate on the lowest taxed crop, gram, among our seven
selected crops does not fall below 30 dams per bigha in any pargana, as
 shown in Table 2.3. Moreover, the A’in-i Akbari tells us elsewhere that
while ‘the yield (basil) from a bigha in every locality (qasba) varies, it is


    7 H. Blochmann, ed., Ain-i Akbari, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1867-7, vol. I,
pp. 356-63 (suba Agra) and pp. 363-76 (suba Delhi). The figures have been
compared (and corrected) by reference to dastur tables in Br. Lib. MS Add.7652.
That these darrwr-circles possibly originated out of administrative changes (and
not on the basis of agricultural zones) is shown by Akbar’s Jarman of 1564 (MM-
55) which puts Mathura in sarkar Bayana and by the Braj document of Samvat
1650 (ad 1593) (Wright 5), which refers to ‘the karori (revenue-collector) Rai
Mathuradas Sahgal of sarkar Bayana, and the sikdar (shiqqdar, sub-collector) of
pargana Mathura, Banarasidas’. Bayana was by 1593 not a sarkar, but headquarters
of the dastur-cirde to which Mathura belonged. Yet the old designation seems
to have lingered, because the earlier administrative arrangements continued in a
modified form, with the old sarkar retained as a t/tnnir-circlc. (See also Chapter
3).
                 TABLE 2.3. Dasturs in Dams and Jttals per Bigha
                            (1 dam = 25 jital)
                               A. Rabi Crops
Ddstur Circle    Pargana                Wheat                  Gran.[            Barley (Ord.)
Delhi            Tilpat                  63.0                  36.23                42.12
Palwal           Palwal                 64.21                  33.14                42.12
Agra             Mahavan                 67.2                  44.18                 49.5
                 Jalesar                                                                ?9
Bay ana          01                      67.2                  42.12                44.17
                                            J.*                                         99
                 Mangotla
                                                                                        9)
                 Au
                 Mathura
Sahar            Sahar                   67.2                  36.23                42.12
                 Kam an                                                                 99
                                             n                                          99
                 Koh
                 Majahid
                                                                   tJ                    99
                 Hodal
Pahari           Pahari             64.21                      36.23                42.12
Koi              Koi                    60.9                   35.20                 40.6
Thana Farida     Noh                    58.4                   34.17                 38.0
                              B. Kharif Crop s
Ddstur Circle   Pargana     Rice (Ord.)           Cotton (Ord.)         Indigo      Sugarcane
Delhi           Tilpat          55.7                  89.11              161.0       127.11
Palwal          Palwal         58.14                   95.1              161.0       138.11
Agra            Mahavan         60.9                   87.5             156.13       147.15
                Jalesar            J?                     J?                 J?           n
Bayana          01              58.4                  89.11             158.19       148.17
                                                          99                              9)
                Mangotla
                                                          99                  99          99
                Au
                                                          99                  99          »
                Mathura
Sahar           Sahar           58.4                   95.1              163.0        138.6
                                   J?                     99                 99           99
                Kaman
                                                                             99           99
                Koh
                                                          99                 M            99
                Majahid
                                                          7?                              »
                Hodal
Pahari          Pahari        63.18                   89.11              161.0        125.6
Koi             Koi           46.24                   89.11              162.1        134.4
Thana Farida    Noh           46.24                   93.23             160.24        134.4
               Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography                 47

seldom less than one rupee*, each rupee being then worth 40 dams,8 The
context suggests that Abul Fazl has here in mind the net income that the
grantees could derive from their holding of a bigha, rather than the value
of the gross produce it yielded. In other words, this would approximate
to the net revenue the government expected to derive from a btgha of
cultivated land. Even if we allow for the fact that thejiaww' or naqdt stated
in the A’in-i Akbaris tables represents not the gross revenue collected, but
the expected net tax-income,9 it is inconceivable that any cultivated area
could have yielded an amount of less than 10 dams per bigha in net gain
to the state. And we should remember that we are not allowing anything
for state income from sources other than land, which if made would
further lower the amount of land-tax in relation to the ardzl. We must,
therefore, concede the fact that measurement must have included large
areas of untaxed cultivable waste, including pastures and long-abandoned
                      (Measurement here could, doubtless, mean accepting
fields and fallows.1011
past survey records or a rapid eye-survey by the assessor). Where the
measured area is exceptionally large in relation to the Jama* of the pargana,
one must assume, then, that the pargana had a particularly large expanse
of uncultivated land, the abandoned fields perhaps being marked on the
ground and thus measured but not paying tax. It denotes a situation where
the land-man ratio was very favourable, and large numbers of fields could
be left fallow throughout the year.
    The contrary assumption that where the J/A is high, the cultivated area
was much larger in extent relative to the total area, would be valid only
when one is reasonably certain that the measured area included the bulk of
the total surface area (let us call it the ‘map area’). As S. Moosvi has shown
from the A7n-t Akbaris own data, in large areas of eastern Uttar Pradesh,
only a small part of the map area had been measured.11 But in Braj Bhum

   8 Blochmann, ed., /hn-i Akbarl, vol. I, p. 199. This statement occurs in the
chapter on suyurghdl. That this assumption generally prevailed in the Mughal
administration in Akbar’s time is shown by a curious artificiality of ardzl figures
in bighas in a number of mahals in the Lahore province in the A’in-i Akbarl, viz.,
these are simply obtained by dividing the jama1' figure given in dams by
approximations of the number 40 (41.2 in mahals or parganas of Sind Sagar
Doab and 39.8 in mahals elsewhere). See Moosvi, Economy of Mughal Empire,
pp. 68-9.
   ’ Cf. Moosvi, Economy of Mughal Empire, p. 130.
   10 Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, 1556-1707, 3rd edn.,
New Delhi, 1999, pp. 3—7; Moosvi, op. cit., pp. 41-4.
   11 Moosvi, op. cit., pp. 46-8. She also notes (p. 47) that ‘exceptionally low
J/A’ in some areas ‘can be attributed to a high proportion of waste included in
48                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

and its surrounding region, measurement would appear to have covered
the entire area, since in some dfzstar-circles, like those of Meerut, Agra
and Etawa, Moosvi found the drazi to even exceed the map area.12 We can
thus broadly assume for Braj Bhum, that if J/A in the Ajn, is low, there
were extensive stretches of waste land; and if J/A is high, much of the
measured land was being cultivated. On this basis, we have shown in our
Map 2 the J/As (rounded to the nearest whole number) for each pargana
within the coverage of the map. It can be seen that the statistics display
a definite pattern. Over a large belt west of the Yamuna, extending across
Braj Bhum, the J/A is lower than 10 dams in each pargana within the belt.
To the east of the river, in the Doab, a similar belt extends from Noh to
Jalesar. But for these two belts, the J/A is fairly high, exceeding 20 dams
in many/wrgnmzs. Indeed, if one examines the statistics for the Braj Bhum
parganas, then none except Mathura (an urban pargana, with few villages),
Maholi (so close to Mathura, but strangely excluded from Braj Bhum) and
01, show a J/A higher than 20 dams, so that one can argue that, unlike
its surrounding areas, Braj Bhum was marked by a large extent of waste
and pasture. The sacred vans could thus have had an actual existence at
the time. In his memoir on Mathura, in 1882, ES. Growse dwelt on the
contrast between the relative aridity and extensive pasturages to the west
of the Yamuna, and the rich cultivation, with little room for pasturages,
in the Doab.1314As regards the extent of untilled land west of the Yamuna,
this is what the Airis statistics also demonstrate, as shown in our Map 2,
but there is strong evidence here of large areas of currently uncultivated
waste in a belt on the east side of the Yamuna as well. It must also be said
that Braj Bhum as a whole shows lower levels of current cultivation than                !
the zones around it.                                                                   s
    The A’in-i Akbaris tables put the figures of the column following                 V
 those of jama/naqdi under the heading of suyurgbal, a term preferred by               <
Abu 1 Fazl over its synonym madad-i ma‘ash, meaning lands granted tax-                j
 free. Since the imperial farmans recording such land-grants usually state            V
them in terms of area, e.g. so many bighas and biswasg4 it is surprising
that the-yfYns tables should record figures under suyurghdl in terms of


the surveyed area’.
   12 Ibid., pp. 40-1.
   13 F.S. Growse, Mathura: a District Memoir, original ed., 1882, reprint New         5
Delhi, 1979, pp. 2-3. In a note on p. 2 Growse contrasts the extensive tillage of      ■
pargana Jalesar with the lack of it to the west of the Yamuna, though for Jalesar      ■
too the /f in’s statistics suggest a very low J/A, much like the rest of Braj Bhum.    »
   14 Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd edn., pp. 345-46.                                    i
         TAX INCIDENCE PER UNIT OF
Map 2.     RECORDED AREA,1595




                                     Fqiz Habib
              Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography              49

                   TABLE 2.4. Braj Bhum Parganas: Suyurghdl

Pargana                Amount of Revenue alienated in     % ofgross jama*
                            Suyurghdl (dams)
Mathura                           69,770                         6.04
Sahar                              21,678                        0.85
Mangolta                           79,655                        6.96
01                                 81,542                        1.48
Au (Ao)                            36,879                        3.58
Pahari                             26,045                        2.12
Kaman                               1,229                        0.24
Koh Mujahid                             0                        0.00
Khohri                             96,919                        2.22
Noh                                29,160                   ,    2.22
Hodal                              36,140                        7.81
Palwal                           2,18,365                        12.34
Til pat                            95,583                         3.01
Mahavan                          2,84,707                         4.20
 Jalesar                         4,12,080                         6.03
 Koi                             4,45,228                         4.28


 money, i.e. so many dams. Moosvi has established that these amounts,
 representing the revenue alienated through grants, were first added to the
jama to get the figures for gross revenue in the preceding column (jamaf
 naqdt), and that they themselves are derived from estimates of income
 from individual revenue-grants made while implementing Akbar’s order of
 1578 to concentrate existing grants in designated villages.15 We present the
A'ln-i Akbaris suyurghdl figures for the Braj Bhum parganas in Table 2.4.
    The distinct existence of zones where land-grants were apparently less
 frequently solicited, or made, may be of some ethnographical significance
 in view of the nature of the class of land-grantees. They were largely
 Muslim, with a preponderance of theological and professedly literate, if not
 learned, ‘respectable’ elements.16 The zone where the size of suyurghdl falls
 below 3 per cent ofjama*, then, must have contained a proportionately low
 level of Muslim middle-class population. This accords with what Growse
 found in the area lying to the west of the Yamuna within the district of


    15 Moosvi, Economy of Mughal Empire, pp. 159-61, 172—76.
    16 Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd edn., pp. 345-46, 352-57.
50                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 Mathura—an 'almost total absence of the Muhammadan elements in the
 population’.17
     A fact that Moosvi had marked from a scrutiny of parganas carrying
 large suyurghal figures in Uttar Pradesh was that they corresponded
 with urban concentrations, from which she drew the conclusion that
 'the grantees were in large part a town-based class’.18 In the case of Braj
 territory, this is borne out by the figures for Mathura: we know from our
 documents that this pargana could have had very few villages attached to
 it. The pargana Mahavan stretched along the east bank of the Yamuna
 northward up to beyond Mat; and to the west of the river, villages in
 Mathura’s vicinity, such as Sei, Atas, and Sonrakh, belonged to pargana
 Sahar, while close to it on the south was situated Maholi, the seat of a
 separate pargana. Much of the assessed revenue (januT) of the pargana of
 Mathura must therefore have come from urban taxation rather than land-
 tax, so that its high jamaVarazi rate did not necessarily represent a high
 land-revenue collection. Yet suyurghal here amounted to 6.04 per cent of
jama, while there was no suyurghal at all reported from Maholi, adjoining
 it on the south, and only to the extent of 0.85 per cent o£jama‘ from the
 large Sahar pargana adjoining it on the west and north. It is, however,
worth recalling that the priests of the temples of Vrindavan and Mathura
 also held large land-grants within the pargana of Mathura, presumably
alongside Muslim grantees.19
     In the final three columns of the A’ln’s tables against each pargana
we have the names of the zamlndar/burm castes, tribes or communities
 (qauni), followed by the numbers of horsemen and foot-retainers that the
zamindars maintained (see Table 2.1 in this Chapter as well as Table 1.1
 in Chapter 1). For this reason, it can be safely said that the A’ln-i Akbari
is India’s first ethnographic survey (although confined to the landholding
classes), just as it is our first statistical report, owing to the variety of
quantitative information it offers. Its degree of accuracy in respect of the


    17 Growse, op. cit., p. 5. This blank statement needs qualification, however,
Farid Bhakkarl, writing in 1651 in his Zakhiratu’l Khawanln, ed. S.Moimul Haq,
Karachi, vol. II, 1970, p. 207, speaks of the Shaikhzadas belonging to the Siddiqi
sept, who were to be found at Deotana, ‘near Mathura’, and who furnished
reliable recruits to the establishment of a contemporary ‘Mughal’ noble,
Allahvardi Khan.
    18 Moosvi, op. cit., pp. 162-9. The statement quoted appears on p. 169.
    19 See Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘Akbar and the Temples of
Mathura and its Environs’, PIHC, 48th session (1987/1988, Goa), pp. 234—50
(Chapter 3 in the present volume).
              Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography              51

information about zamindars may be illustrated by one example. It tells
us that inpargana Mahavan, the zamindars were ‘Sayyids, Brahmans, etc?
In 1882, besides Brahmans and Jats, Growse in fact reports a large Sayyid
clan among the land-owners in Mahavan proper and four other villages.20
We can further deduce from the addition of the Jats to the list that the
Jats possibly obtained their zamindari in the pargana after the rise of the
Jat kingdom in the eighteenth century.
   If we confine our study of the caste-composition of zamindars within
Braj Bhum, based on castes recorded in the A’in-i Akbari, and appearing
in our Table 2.1, the position of the Rajput clans, whether specified
by their individual names or simply recorded under the designation of
'Rajput’, seems to have been a dominant one: they are present in 8 of
the 15 parganas. Among the Rajput clans, the Bachhal and Kachhwahas
are recorded in pargana Sahar. Now, Growse tells us that the Gauruas,
deemed an inferior caste among the Rajputs, have different septs called
Kachhwahas, Jasawats and Sisodiyas, the last more commonly called
Bachhals.21 The Bachhal and Kachhwahas, recorded in pargana Sahar,
were thus presumably Gauruas, forming a class of superior peasants,
whom we meet frequently in the Vrindavan documents from the area,
where we also encounter a Gaurua peasant calling himself a Jasawat, while
some other Gauruas belong to the Jadon sept.22
   As for the Jats, while they are not recorded in the A’in, under Mahavan,
they still appear among the zamindar castes in the Braj Bhum parganas of
Hodal, Noh, Sahar, Kaman and Koh Mujahid, as well as other neighbouring
parganas like Nonera, Bhadauli, and Khatumar, besides Agra. They thus
stood next to the Rajputs in the extent of their landed possessions. Meos
appear in only Kaman and Koh Mujahid, but are recorded in a line of
parganas adjoining Braj Bhum on its west. Gujars are only recorded under
Sahar, within Braj Bhum; and Muslims in general (‘Shaikhzadas’) only in
Ao, while Afghans are recorded in Noh. Rather surprisingly, Brahmans


   20 Growse, op. cit., pp. 13 & 398. In H.M, Elliots Map, showing ‘Zameendaree
Possession’ in 1844, H.M. Elliot, Memoirs ...of the Races of the North-Western
Provinces, revised and ed. John Beames, London, 1869, vol. II, p. 203, only
Brahmans and Jats are shown holding possession in pargana ‘Muhabun.
   21 Growse, pp. 11-12, also pp. 376-7.
   22 For references to Gaurua peasants of Vrindavan, see IVS 208 (of 1594);
Govind-dev 39, of ah 1068/1653; Govind-dev (Wright 12), of ah 1064/ad 1654;
Madan Mohan 114 (of 1701); to Gauruas of the Jadon sept at Arith (Radhakund),
NAI-269/11 (of 1717); to Gauruas of vill. Sakitra in pareana Mangotla, Madan
Mohan (of 1722).
52                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

are not prominent, being recorded only under two Braj Bhum parganas,
viz,, Mahavan (as already noticed by us) and 01.
   We conclude these notes with one on the major route that ran through
Braj territory west of the Yamuna, on which went travellers, messengers
and much merchandise. This was the highway that connected Agra with
Delhi.
   An early European traveller was William Finch, who in 1611 took
along this route twelve carts full of parcels of indigo meant for the Lahore
market. He mentions the places he passed through, viz., Badegsara (Bad
ki Sarai), Acabarpore (Akbarpur) and Houdle (Hodal). By some failure of
memory he confused Akbarpur with Mathura (which he fails to mention)
as being ‘famous for the antiquities of Indian gobins (gosdinsTj and
containing a temple with many idols nearby.23 Then we have the diary
of 1‘timad ‘All Khan who records the major places or stations on the
route between Agra and Delhi that he passed through during a journey
he undertook twice in 1716: it took him seven days when he did not stay
anywhere (except at nights). On the first journey he spent eight days
at Mathura. On both occasions, the places he mentioned as situated on
the road between Mathura and Delhi were Odal/Hodal (both spellings
given) and Farldabad.24 Finally, the Chahdr Gulshan of Rai Chaturman
(completed in 1760) gives us the following list of staging stations on the
route from Mathura leading north towards Delhi: Jait, Chhata, Deotana,
Kosi, Hodal and Banchari, followed by a number of other staging places
until one reached the fort of Shahjahanabad (Delhi). Towards Agra it
records Koela, Aurangabad, Ghoghat (not located), Jhandipur and Farah.25
   The line of the route indicated by these accounts is confirmed by the
positions of Mughal ‘^os-pillars’ that have survived, such being shown
on the Survey of India’s one-inch maps. These were set up by Jahangir
on the highway from Agra all the way to Lahore at every karoh or kos,
and he had previously ordered rows of trees to be planted by the side
of the road.26 Bernier noticed both the rows of trees and the kos pillars
while travelling from Delhi to Agra in 1663, attributing both correctly to



   23 See William Foster, ed., Early Travels in India, 1583-1619, London, 1927/
reprint, New Delhi, 1968, p. 155.
   24 Ftimad ‘All Khan. Miratul Haqaiq, MS, Bodl: Fraser 124, ff. 132b, 138b,
139a. On the remarks entered by this author on Vrindavan, see Chapter 1.
   25 Rai Chaturman Saksena, Chahdr Gulshan, Aligarh Muslim University
Library, Habibganj Collection 32/157, f. 137b. Read ‘Jait’ for ‘Jast’.
   26 Jahangir, Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, ed. Saiyid Ahmad, Aligarh, 1863-4, p. 277.
              Notes on the Economic and Ethnographic Geography              53

Jahangirs endeavours.27 All three accounts speak of sarais, or inns found
at various stages along the route for the convenience of travellers, built
mostly by nobles and other charitable persons, the better inns being built
of baked bricks (pukhta), others apparently just mud-walled.




  27 Francois Bernier, Travels in the Mogul Empire, 1658-67, tr. A. Constable,
2nd edn., revised by V.A. Smith, London, 1916, p. 284.
THE STATE
                              CHAPTER 3



              Akbar and the Temples of
                the Mathura Region
                 Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib




The numerous documents of Akbar’s reign, in what may be called the
Vrindavan Archives, are broadly divisible into two groups: (a) orders of
the Mughal administration concerning grants to the temples and temple­
servants and, in one case, temple management; and (b) sale-deeds of rights
to land acquired by or sold to temple-servants or devotees.
   The present chapter focuses on documents belonging to group (a).1
Full translations of the documents (except for Doc. No. 5, for which a
full translation is not necessary) are offered in Appendix 1 at the end of
the chapter. In our main text they are referred to by the number we have
given to their translation. If a document belongs to the VRI (Vrindavan
Research Institute), the collection and the number assigned to the
document concerned are indicated in the note preceding its translation.
Two forgeries (VRI acc. Nos. 2 and 36), not apparently recognized as such
so far, have been ignored in our study, but they are commented upon in
Appendix 2. The translations strictly follow the spellings of names given
in the original documents. In most cases they are of some interest as they
represent the way in which the names were then pronounced in Braj
country. The occurrence of the spelling ‘Mathur’ or ‘Mathura’ instead of
 Mathura’ is important for its confirming the early date of the documents.12

   1 Beside the Vrindavan collection and NAI, the only known documents from
Akbar’s reign belonging to this category and relating to Braj Bhum are those
published by Krishanlal Mohanlal Jhaveri, ed., Imperial Farmdns (ad 1577 to ad
1803) granted to the Ancestors ofHis Holiness the Tikayat Maharaj, Bombay, 1928.
  2 Abu’l Fazl in the A’in-i Akbari (c.1595) already uses the more accurate
58                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   The documents presented here tell us much that is of interest about
the temples of Mathura and Vrindavan, and about the implementation of
Akbar’s religious policy. In addition, they shed light on other matters of
historical interest, notably Mughal administrative practices. We propose
to cover the latter ground too, but it is best to first concentrate on the
temples and their relations with the Mughal administration.


                                         II

Akbar’s farman in respect of‘Gobind Rai’ (Govind-dev) temple (Doc. No.
4), on its zimn (reverse) gives us a statement of all the grants previously
made to temple-servants. These were conferred through four farmans, the
earliest of which was issued on 5 Jumada II 972/8 January 1565. It is our
good fortune that this has been preserved in the collection of the Madan
Mohan Temple (our Doc. No. 1 in Appendix 1 of this chapter).
    This farman assigns two hundred bighas of land in in dm (revenue-free
gift) to Gopaldas. There is no indication in the text of the farman that
Gopaldas had any religious status; but the listing of the grant as one to
temples/temple-servants in Doc. No. 4 and its preservation in the Madan
Mohan Temple archives both show that this must have been the case.
Indeed, it was, apparently, on this basis that the Madan Mohan Temple
was deemed in Doc. No. 4 to be holding 120 bighas by previous grants,
and its sister-temple Govind-dev, 70 bighas [Doc. 4, zimn, 11(b) (i) &
(ii)]. Both these temples belonged to the Chaitanya sect, and our Doc.
No. 2 shows that in 1568, their management (adhikar) was vested in a
single person, Jiv Gosa’in (Jiva Goswami).3 Eleven years later, ‘Gopaldas
pujari, son of Radha Ballabh, appears as the representative (wakil) of ‘Jiv
Gosa’in, son of Ballabh Gosa’in’, purchaser of land in village Arith alias
Radhakund, in a sale-deed dated 9 Shawwal 987/29 November 1579,4 Our
Doc. No. 3 shows Todar Mai making a grant of 100 bighas to ‘Gopaldas,



spelling ‘Mathura*. The farman of 1598 (Docs. 4 and 5), issued upon the
recommendations of a committee headed by him, nevertheless consistently uses
the spelling ‘Matura(h)’.
   3 Jiv or Jlu or Ji in Hindi derives from Sanskrit Jiva\ and similarly sain is the
popular Hindi form of Skt. Svami. Hence Jiv or Jlu Gosa’in for Jiva Gosvami.
Henceforth in this chapter we will use the more common spelling; Swami.
   4 This document is not numbered, and the collection to which it belongs does
not appear from the photocopy.
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                 59

sevak (servant) of Sri Madan Mohan (temple)’ in Rabi‘ II 992/April-May
 1584. Gopaldas here must then be the same as the recipient of the grant
in Doc. No. 1: he must be held to have received the imperial grant of 200
bighas in 1565 in his capacity as zpujdri and servant of the Madan Mohan
Temple. His subordinate relationship to Jiv Goswami is established by the
sale-deed of 1579 we have just cited. He was still alive in 1598, since Doc.
No. 4 does not record him as dead, a statement it makes separately about
all the other grantees whose names it furnishes.
    The reverse side (zimri) of Doc. No. 1 is obscured through having large
pieces of paper pasted over it. We therefore miss the kind of information
we are given in the zimn of Doc. No. 4, where we are told that the grant
to Gopaldas was made ‘on the report’ (ba-risdla) of Raja Bhar Mai, the
ruler of Amber, and the first Rajput chief of importance to enter Akbar’s
service (1561). The association of Raja Bhar Mai with the imperial grant
to Gopaldas in 1565 suggests that the patronage extended by the Amber
court to the Chaitanya establishments of Madan Mohan and Govind-dev
long preceded Man Singhs munificent reconstruction of the Govind-dev
Temple in Akbar’s 34th regnal year (1590).5
    Our documents Nos. 2 and 3 show that the priests of the Vrindavan
temples cast their nets yet wider and were also able to attract the attention
of Akbar’s famous minister, Todar Mai. Doc. No. 2 is zfarmdn explicitly
issued on the representation of that minister in favour of ‘Jiv Gosa’in’.
The farmdn is dated 14 Rabi4 II 976/6 October 1568.6 It implies that Jiv
Gosa’in, ‘a poor man, praying for His Majesty’, needed to be protected in
his right of management (adhikar) of the two temples Madan Mohan and
‘Gobind Rai’ (Govind-dev), entrusted to him by his uncle Rup Gos’ain. He
was accordingly assured by the farman of such protection, and, further, of
the right to claim all offerings (khairat) at the temples and to transfer or
will away such right. Jiv Goswami ultimately exercised the last-mentioned
right, and his will dated 1606 and 1608 has survived.7



    5 See F.S. Growse, Mathura: a District Memoir, 1882, photo-reprint, New
Delhi, 1979, pp, 243-44, where the text and translation of the inscription
recording the construction are given. The text and translation of the same
inscription are also furnished by G.N. Bahura in Margaret H. Cease, ed.,
Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, New Delhi, 1993, p. 200.
    6 The date ‘ah 999 (ad 1590)’ given in T. Mukherjee and J.C. Wright, ‘An
Early Testamentary Document in Sanskrit’, BSOAS, XLII(2), 1979, p. 315, is a
slip.
    7 Cf. T. Mukherjee and J.C. Wright, op. cit., pp. 297-320.
60                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    Todar Mai maintained his interest in the two temples, and in 1584,
when he apparently held the area in Jagir, made a grant of one hundred
bighas of land, ‘cultivated, khwud-kashta’ to Gopaldas, the ‘sevak of the
Madan Mohan temple’. The grant of revenue of land already wholly
cultivated was a mark of special favour; but what the term khwud-kashta
(lit. ‘self-cultivated*) implies here is not very clear. It may mean that
the land was already being cultivated by, or under the management of,
Gopaldas; or, if this was not the case, that the grantee was free to evict the
peasants and make it khwud-kashtaf This particular grant was converted
into an Imperial grant by Jahangir through a Jarman of his eighth regnal
year (1613), issued in favour of‘Srichand, sevak (servant) of devala Sri
Madan Mohan’, successor to Gopaldas, who was by then dead.8           9 Such
conversion prevented the grant from being subject to the favour of each
succeeding jagjrdar of the area.


                                        Ill

To return to our Docs. Nos, 1 and 2: Doc. 1 shows that as early as January
 1565 Akbar had become willing to confer revenue-grants for the benefit
of temples. It is, in any case, the earliest known surviving revenue-grant
to a Hindu divine made by Akbar. Doc. No. 2 shows his willingness to
interfere in matters of temple-management and, in effect, appoint the
recipient of temple offerings. A noteworthy feature of the Jarman is that
the zimn contains the endorsement by Akbar’s well-known (and orthodox)
Sadru’s Sudiir (minister in charge of grants), Shaikh ‘Abdu’n Nabi, with all
his titles. The endorsement means that officially the Jarman was supposed
to be a grant, as if the custody of temple offerings emanated from the
Emperor, and so fell within the jurisdiction of the Sadrus Sudiir,
   The two documents may be placed alongside some early episodes
of Akbar’s reign. A Mughal officer, writing of incidents he witnessed,
speaks of a conversation Akbar had with his then Governor of the
Panjab, Shamsu’ddin Atka, in ah 968/1560-1. While on a march, when
the emperor taxed him with his letting his head hair grow, Shamsu’ddin


   8 But see H. Blochmann, ed., Ain-i Akbari, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1867-7,
vol. I, p. 287, where the revenue-collector is asked not to permit revenue-grantees
to turn ra‘iyati (peasant-cultivated) lands into their khwud-kashta.
   9 Original in VRI, Radhakund Collection No. 143A; an early copy, Radhakund
Collection, no. 166. Since the original is much damaged, the copy helps us to
restore the text.
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                 61

Atka replied that since Mathura was on their route, he would have his
hair shaved there, just as the Hindus do while visiting that place. The
emperor, we are told, was pleased at the reply?0 In fact, the friendliness
towards his Hindu subjects soon manifested itself in more substantive
forms: the abolition of the pilgrimage tax came in 1562 and of thenzvu
(poll-tax on non-Muslims) in 1564. These measures mentioned by Abu’l
Fazl were probably of real substance and not mere formal gestures.11 Our
Docs. Nos. 1 and 2 suggest that the change in the 1560s went beyond
nominal declarations: there was a new outlook at work in dealing with the
temples and the holy men ofVrindavan and Mathura, and so presumably
elsewhere as well.
    Indeed, the fact that land-grants to religious individuals among the
Hindus began to be made within the 1560s is also attested by later official
documents of 1719 and 1722 (IVS 159 and 191 -2).which refer to the
continuance of a madad-i ma‘ash grant originally made by Akbar in ah
976/1568-9 to one Madho (priest of the Gopinath Temple, Vrindavan) in
village Raj pur, near Vrindavan. The grant was large, amounting originally
to 100 bighas, but reduced to 76 bighas 2 biswas upon the subsequent change
to measurement by bamboo rod and the introduction of gaz-i ildhi—
reference to which reductions reinforces our belief in the genuineness of
the original grant. In the surviving zimn of a later document (IVS 175),
we find a similar reference to a grant made by Akbar on 11 Rabi* II 984
 (8 July 1576) of an area of 30 bighas to one Bhagwandas in a village
 (Hasang) of pargana Mahaban (Mahavan), near Mathura across the river
Yamuna.
    The grants subsequently made to temples in the area before 1598 have
 not survived. Doc. No. 4, which we may expect to give us comprehensive
 information, lists three other farmans of grants, the earliest of which is
 dated 4 Rajab 983/9 October 1575, granting Chain Gopal (dead by 1598)
 an area of 70 bighas of land, on the report of Shahbaz Khan,10  12 in village
                                                                 11


   10 Bayazid Bayat, Tazkira-i Humayun o Akbar, ed. M. Hidayat Husain, Bib.
Ind., Calcutta, 1941, p. 245.
   11 Cf. Iqtidar Alam Khan, ‘The Nobility under Akbar and the Development
of his Religious Policy, 1560-80’, JRAS, 1968, p. 32. The co-author (I. Habib)
confesses that he too had once shared I.A. Khan’s scepticism about the
significance of these measures.
   12 Shahrullah Kambu had been given the title of Shahbaz Khan in ah 981
(1573-4); he was appointed Mir Bakhshi (central minister in charge of the army
and intelligence) in ah 985 (1577-8) (M. Athar Ali, The Apparatus of Empire,
Delhi, 1985, entries A6 & A87). The office he held in 1575-6 is not known.
62                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 Lomaknagar (? unidentified) in pargana Mathura. It is impossible to
 say with which temple the grantee was connected. The reference to the
parwanchas of Qazi Khan and Raja Bhagwandas (Bhar Mai’s successor as
 ruler of Amber) may indicate no more than that these officers subsequently
 held the area in jagir and issued orders acknowledging the grant.
     Soon afterwards, again, ‘on the report of Shahbaz Khan’, a farmdn was
 issued in Shawwal 983/January 1576, conferring grants of 320 bighas on
 five persons (all dead by 1598). An area of 160 bighas was still held in 1598
 on the basis of the original grant (by their successors, presumably). The
 grants were located in villages Dosaij (Dosaich) and Dhaulera. Since the
 Akrur temple was deemed to hold a grant in Dhaulera, one of the grantees,
 Ramdas, to whom land was assigned in that village, was apparently a priest
 of this temple. Besides the Madan Mohan and ‘Gobind Rai’ temples,
 already accounted for by Doc. No. 1, the other temples recognized as
 holding grants previously in village Dosaij were those of Gopinath, Radha
Ballabh, and Nandnandan; and we may infer that the other four grantees
were priests of these temples. Apparently, the grant made to Madho, priest
 of the Gopinath Temple, in 1568-9 was overlooked in 1598. As to who
was the priest of that temple among the four deceased grantees holding
grants in Dosa ij (Vrindavan) by the farmdn of 1576 cannot be determined,
except that it could not have been Harbans. For he, given an original grant
of 100 bighas, is surely Harivans, founder of the Radhavallabhi sect. He
was, according to tradition, born in Samvat 1559 (ad 1502), so he could
well have died between 1576 and 1598. He established the Radhavallabh
Temple at Vrindavan; and the grant of 70 bighas by gaz-i ildhi in 1598 was
in lieu of 40 bighas, in the old measure, to which the original area of the
temple’s grant (100 bighas) had been reduced after Harivans’s death.13
    In 1577 there occurred an incident in which Mathura figured, and
which seemed to bring the breach between Akbar and the Muslim
orthodoxy still more into the open. ‘Abdu’r Rahim, the qdzi of Mathura,
complained that ‘a rich Brahman of that place took away materials that
the complainant had assembled to build a mosque, and used them for a
temple the Brahman himself was constructing’. When taxed with this,
the latter spoke abusively of the Prophet and Muslims. An enquiry by
Birbal and Abul Fazl was instituted, and Abu’l Fazl, at least, found that
there was testimony enough to support the complaint. The Brahman was
thereupon detained. Notwithstanding Akbar’s unwillingness to award him

   13 The information on Harivans is drawn from Growse, District Memoir,
pp. 199-208. For further references to works on Harivans and Radhavallabhis,
see J.S. Hawley, Surdas, Poet, Singer, Saint, Delhi, 2018, p. 74 n.
                Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                        63

 any extreme punishment, his Sadr (Minister for grants) Shaikh ‘Abclu’n
 Nabi, had him executed. Not only was Akbar greatly annoyed over this, but
 theologians also came forward to point out that according to the Hanafite
 school of Muslim law that was followed in India, a non-Muslim subject
 of a Muslim ruler could not be punished for blasphemy. When Badauni,
 to whom we owe a detailed report of the incident, tried to defend Shaikh
 ‘Abdu’n Nabl’s action, this aroused such fury in Akbar that Badauni had
 to retire precipitately from the Emperors presence.14
    The incident, in any case, does not seem to have had any effect on
 Akbar’s policy about grants to temples in Mathura and its vicinity. By a
farmdn issued on 28 Ziqa’d 987/16 January 1580, ‘on the report of Raja
 Blrbar’, or Birbal, a grant of 100 bighas of land was made to Ramdas
 (dead by 1598) in village Gantoli, pargana Sahar. Since the temples of
 Govardhan and Hari Gopal Rai were deemed in 1598 to hold exactly 100
 bighas in the same village from the previous grant, Ramdas was almost
 certainly a priest of one of these two temples. Thus by 1580 at least seven
 temples (devalas) in the environs of Mathura had become beneficiaries of
 Imperial grants of tax-free lands.
    On 9 December 1581 Akbar himself visited Mathura, 'that ancient
 pilgrim town, in order to observe the spectacle of those sunk in the
 domain of the search for Reality’.15 Whether he visited temples or merely
 conversed with Mathura’s religious men is not made clear. In any case, no
 grants to temples seem to have followed immediately afterwards. Indeed,
 to go by the official information given in Doc. No. 4, there was no further
 Imperial revenue grant made to any of the temples in the Mathura region
 during the eighteen years following 1580. This reinforces one’s doubts
 about the authenticity of two farmans of 1593 reproduced by Jhaveri
 granting tax-remissions in one village and making a revenue-grant of the
 entire village of Gokul, to Gosain Vithalrai for the expenses of the temple
 of ‘Gordhan Nath’ (Govardhan Nath) at Gokul. The farmans do not seem
 to have been prepared in the Imperial chancery, though there are otherwise
 no obvious errors in the texts such as are found in the two VRI forgeries
 discussed in Appendix 2 of this chapter.16 However, this was the period in


   14 For the entire episode see 'Abdu’l Qadir Badauni, Muntakhabut Tawdrikb,
ed. Ali, Ahmad and Lees, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1864-9, vol. Ill, pp. 80-83.
   15 Abu’l Fazl, Akbarnama, ed. Agha Ahmad Ali and Abdur Rahim, Bib. Ind,
Calcutta, 1873-86, vol. Ill, p. 373.
   16 The two farmans in Jhaveri’s collection are numbered IV and V in his
English translations; the photographs of the documents are unnumbered. The
quality of their writing, especially in the titles (rugfcra), and the ignorance of the
64                      Braj Bhitm in Mughal Times

 which Akbar’s policy of religious tolerance flowered fully, and though the
farmans for the two tax-grants of 1593 may possibly not be genuine, there
 are other quite authentic documents in the Jhaveri collection reflective of
 this policy. There is an imperial farman of 1581, and then orders of the
 Queen Mother, Hamida Banu Begam, of the same year, and another by
 ‘Abdu’r Rahim Khan-i Khanan, of 1588, all permitting free grazing by the
 cows and oxen of Vithalrai of ‘Gordhan’ or Govardhan.17 In 1593 Akbar
 issued a. farman, prohibiting the slaughter and hunting of peacocks in the
parganas of Mathura, Sahar, Mangotla and Ao.18 The order was obviously
 issued with the sanctity of Mathura and its neighbourhood in mind.


                                       IV

We may now consider the contents of what we believe to be one of the
most fascinating documents regarding religious grants that came out of
Akbar’s chancery, namely, Doc. No. 4. This contains his farman of 1598,
which record^ land-grants made to thirty-five named temples of Mathura
and its environs. From what is stated on the zimn (reverse) of the farman,
the way in which it came to be issued was as follows:
   Akbar ordered Shaikh Abu’l Fazl, his celebrated counsellor and
historian, to enquire into the merits of the different temples of Mathura,
Bindraban, Govardhan, Nandgram (Nandgaon), etc., and propose the area
of land-grant that would be appropriate for each. We know that at this
time Akbar’s court was stationed in Lahore, the city having been the
capital of the empire for upwards of thirteen years (Akbar finally left
Lahore on 26 Aban 43 Z/dbi/18 November 1598).19 Abul Fazl was assigned
the assistance of four persons, ‘Batacharaj, Chintaman Bhat, Upendar

scribe as to the simple requirement that a farman had to begin with two half­
lines, show both documents to be forgeries. The forger might, however, have
been copying genuine documents. This possibility is reinforced by the fact that
a nisbdn of Dara Shukoh of 30 April 1658 cites farmans of Akbar and Jahangir to
confirm the possession of the village Gokul as charity-gift (khairat) in the hands
of the heirs of Girdhar (now deceased), son of Bithal Rai (Jhaveri XI). It is also
possible that our Doc. No. 4 excluded this grant from its purview because it was
situated in the pargana of Mahaban, on the other side of the Yamuna.
    17 Jhaveri, Docs. II, III, and IV. Presumably the area was successively placed
within the jdgjrs of Hamida Banu Begum and Khan-i Khanan. Both refer to the
Imperial farman.
    18 Jhaveri, Doc. IV A. The three other parganas adjoined Mathura.
    19 Abu’l Fazl, Akbamama, p. 746.
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                        65

Misr, and Bhat (?) Pandit’. The names of the first three can be easily
restored to Bhattacharya, Chintamani Bhat, and Upendra Misra, while
at least the word ‘Pandit’ in the fourth name is clear enough. These were
obviously Brahman divines of some status or repute, who were supposed
to possess special knowledge about temples of Mathura and its environs.
None of them, however, is otherwise heard of in the annals of Akbar’s
court. Since the court was then at Lahore, it is not likely that Abul Fazl
and his ‘committee’ actually visited Mathura. We are then left with the
possibility that the four Brahman divines were themselves from the area
concerned, very possibly pleading the case for different groups of temples
there; and Abul Fazl was appointed to consult with them in order to
frame appropriate proposals for the Emperors approval.
    These proposals were put before Akbar on 24 Khurdad 43/14 June
 1598 (Gregorian calendar). The date is interesting for a reason connected
with Abu’l Fazls life: his position at the court had encountered a crisis,
and he temporarily withdrew from the court and all official work on 11
Khurdad/1 June.2021  He returned to duty soon afterwards, but it is not clear
whether he undertook the present task before the crisis, or later. There is
no reference to his work connected with these grants in his Akbarndma.
Despite Akbar’s approval having been obtained on 14 June, the farmdn
was formally issued only on 19 Shahriwar (11 September), though the
 full statement (ta'liqa) copied on the zimn had already been prepared on
 13 Amurdad (5 August),
    The proposals put to Akbar were framed in three categories (shiqqs),
 presumably high, medium, and low as regards the area of grants to be
 conferred. Akbar prudently accepted the second, i.e. presumably the
 medium-level scheme. As accepted, the proposals were in two parts. The
 first part (Zimn, II (A)) dealt with the existing grants. These were found
 to have been made through four farmans granted in favour of eight persons
 in total. Some area having apparently been resumed after the deaths of the
 original grantees, and a certain area deducted on account of the introduction
 of the bamboo-rod, the net area held under previous grants was found to
 be 504 bighasf It was now proposed to supersede these previous grants



   20 Abu’l FaA, Akbarndma, III, pp. 740-41.
   21 Only one farmdn out of the four was issued before the introduction of the
bamboo-rod in Akbar’s 19th regnal year, and so could have been affected by the
deduction on that account. This (see our Doc. No. 1) had specified a grant of
200 bighas. The deduction shown on Doc. No. 5 is 26 bighas, amounting to 13%,
exactly the size of deduction stated as standard in the A’in-i Akbafi, I, p. 297. (Cf.
66                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

by assigning the previously granted area to seven temples,22 with which
the eight grantees were apparently connected, the total area so confirmed
being deemed to be 500 bighas ilahi (Zimn, 11(B)). This was actually on
the generous side, since the previous grants were made in terms of the
older bigha, and the replacement of that unit by the bigha ilahi in Akbar’s
31st or 33rd regnal year would generally have required a reduction in every
grant by at least 10.54%.23 A yet more important feature of the change
proposed was that the previous grants to named persons were now to be
converted into grants to temples as institutions—a practice exceedingly
rare in the Mughal system of revenue-grants. Since the institutions were,
so to speak, deathless, the grants by such conversion became perpetual.
   The second part (Zimn, III) consisted of additional grants proposed for
twenty-eight other temples. The names of the temples already benefiting
from previous grants did not occur in this list, possibly except for the
temple of ‘Gordhan’ (Govardhan) which was assigned a further 9 bighas.24
The total grant proposed was to be of 500 bighas ilahi, half to lie in
cultivated land and half in waste. The average area of land granted to
these temples was naturally smaller than that of the seven temples already
holding lands. But the effect was that the total size of revenue-grants to
the temples of the region was doubled in one stroke. Since a bigha ilahi
was about six-tenths of an acre,25 the total area of the revenue-grants now
decreed amounted to about 600 acres (300 acres held previously and 300
now granted), 600 acres being equal to nearly 243 hectares.
   The temples were finally (Zimn IV (A) and (B)) put into seven groups,
each consisting of a major temple and what were presumably its sister or
daughter foundations. Thus the temple of‘Gobind Rai’ (Govind-dev) was

Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, Bombay, 1963, pp. 354-55;
3rd ed., New Delhi, 2014, pp. 406-08).
    22 Counting ‘the devalas of Gordhan and Hari Gopal Rai’ as one in Zimn, 11(b)
(vi).
    23 A'in-i Akbari, vol. I, p. 297; Habib, Agrarian System, 1st ed., p. 355 & n;
3rd ed., p. 408 & n. Todar Mai’s grant of 100 bighas to Gopaldas, made in 1584
(after the introduction of the bamboo-rod), was reduced to 89 bighas, 9 biswas,
on account of its conversion into gaz-i ilahi (Jahangir's farman, VRI Acc. Nos.
143 A and 166), implying a deduction of exactly 10.55%.
    24 The total number of 35 temples remains unaffected by this duplication,
since Govardhan appears paired with Hari Gopal in the list of temples holding
grants previously, and the two are there counted as one. But see footnote 41 on
‘Gordhan’ temple in Section V.
    25 For the size of the bigha ilahi, see Habib, Agrarian System, 1st ed., pp. 356-
62; 3rd ed., pp. 409-415.
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                     67

grouped with Akrur, Krishan Rai Jalori, and Radha Rawan, while the
temple of Madan Mohan had attached to it those of Devadas Adat and
Jasodha Nandan (Doc. No. 5). Separate farmans were prepared for each
group. Doc. No. 4 is the^rmdn issued to the Govind-dev temple, etc.,
and No. 5 is the one issued to Madan Mohan, etc. (copy).
   All farmans, excepting the one issued to the Govind-dev temple, were
issued on 4 Shahriwar 43/27 August 1598 (Doc. No. 4, Zimn IV (A), &
Doc. No. 5), while the farman to the Govind-dev temple was issued on 19
Shahriwar 43/11 September 1598. The delay may have been necessitated
by the fact that this farman was to carry all the particulars of the entire
scheme of grants, whereas the others (if they were all like Doc. No. 5)
carried only the essential details pertaining to their respective groups of
temples.
   It is most fortunate that the farman to the Govind-dev temple (our Doc.
No. 4) has survived in the original (now in the National Archives),26 while
there is also an early copy (photographed by the team of the International
Association of VRI). Both Docs. 4 and 5 show the farmans as having
been prepared ‘on the report’ (ba-risala) of Azam Khan or Khan-i A‘zam
(Akbar’s foster-brother Mirza ‘Aziz Koka, then the Vakil, the minister
highest in status at the court)27 and during the chauki (‘watch’) of one
of Akbar’s favourite officers, Ramdas Kachhwaha. Doc. No. 4 (original)
predictably contains Mirza ‘Aziz Koka’s seal; but it also bears that of the
famous general of Akbar and Braj poet, ‘Abdur Rahim Khan-i Khanan.
The processing of these grants should have involved the office of the
Sadru’s Sudur, but that minister is mentioned nowhere. However, our
Doc. No. 6 shows that copies of these^rmam went to him whereupon he
too issued parwanchas or orders informing the officials concerned of the
issuance of the grants.28

    26 NAI-2671 (1). We are grateful to Mr. Zakir Husain, then Assistant
Archivist at the National Archives, for drawing our attention to it and letting us
use a copy of it carefully made by him. It was checked by Irhin Habib against the
original, through the kindness of Dr R.K. Perti, Director, National Archives.
   A copy of the full farman (and so, different from our Doc. No. 5), issued to
Madan Mohan temple with all the details given in Doc. No. 4, survives in the
Madan Mohan Collection. Unfortunately, the photocopy obtained of it is so
small in size that I have not been able to read it (I.H.).
    27 His title in Akbamama, III, p. 669, where his appointment as Vakil in 1595
is mentioned, is given as Khan-i A‘zam, not A\zam Khan; and this too is so in
later sources.
    28 The office of Sadrus Sudur was then held by Miran $adr-i Jahan whose
seal is affixed on Doc. No. 6. (For Sadr-i Jahans appointment to the office, see
68                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

                                     V

For the history of the temples of the area, the most valuable service our
Doc. No. 4 renders is to provide us with a list of the major temples
of Mathura and its neighbourhood. The list does not give us the exact
situations (village/town-quarter) of the temples, the villages mentioned
being those not necessarily where the temples, but their land-grants, were
located. At the same time, the area of grant assigned to each may represent
roughly the comparative assessment of its status and popular prestige in
the eyes of the Mughal administration.
   The temples, as we have seen, were divided into seven groups for the
convenience of issuing a limited number of farmans. Each group was
headed by a major temple, and we may begin by considering these temples.
   The devala or temple of‘Gobind Rai’, to which Doc. No. 4 was issued,
is mentioned already in our Doc. No. 2 of 1568 as being situated in ‘the
village of Bindraban’ or Vrindavan. It is the temple of Govind-dev which
was rebuilt by Raja Man Singh in 1590, the date being recorded in an
inscription. It is quite well known as a representative piece of Mughal
architecture, and there is a fairly long description of it by Growse.29
    The farmdn carried in our Doc. No. 4 shows that there were three
temples with separate grants, but attached to Govind-dev. The first of these,
Akrur, still exists in a village of this name (Akraur in old maps) close to
Dhaulera or Dhaurera (between Mathura and Vrindavan), where its grant
was also located. The second temple Krishan Rai cannot be identified, but
the third, Radha Rawan is Radha Raman, located in Vrindavan, though
apparently provided with a new building in the nineteenth century.30 It is
a little surprising that the temple of Radha Damodar, built at Vrindavan
by Jiv Goswami as a daughter-foundation of Govind-dev, is not listed in
the farmdn 31
    We know from our Doc. No. 2 of 1568 that Jiv Goswami (‘Jiv Gosain’)
held the management (adbikar) of the temples of ‘Madan Mohan and
Govind Rai’, so that these two were sister-foundations, which indeed was
the case since both are said to have been built by Jiv s uncles, Rup and
 Sanatan.32 But apparently after Man Singhs munificent reconstruction

Athar Ali, Apparatus of Empire, entry no. A438).
   29 Growse, District Memoir, pp. 241-50 (with plan and photograph).
   30 Ibid., pp. 262-63.
   31 For this temple see ibid., p. 257; also Mukherjee and Wright ‘An Early
Testamentary Document in Sanskrit’ in BOAS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 302.
   32 Growse, District Memoir, pp, 243, 250.
                Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                       69

of the Govind-dev temple, the two became independent entities; and the
Madan Mohan temple (with its own individual grant of 100 bighas as
against the 70 bighas of Govind-dev) headed a separate group of three
temples, to which a separate farman was issued (Doc. No. 5). Like the
Govind-dev temple it was situated at Vrindavan (Doc. No. 1), and there
is, again, a good description of it in Growse.33
    Doc.No. 5 attaches the grants of two other temples to Madan
Mohan, namely, Dwadas Adat, and Jasodha Nandan. The latter cannot
be identified,34 but the former having its grant assigned at Sonrakh
near Vrindavan might have been situated at Jahangirpur Adda nearby,
its second name ‘Adat’/Adda surviving after the place was presumably
renamed during Jahangirs reign.
    Thefarmans issued to the five other groups of temples have not survived,
and we are, therefore, unable to say how the remaining twenty-eight
temples were grouped under them. However, we may assume that the
temples whose names are given for identifying each group were regarded
as the other major temples of the area. The first of these is Gopinath (70
bighas). It was situated at Vrindavan, and its founder Raesil Ji is said to
have received a grant from Akbar. But, in fact, the recipient of Akbar’s
grant in 1568-9, as we have seen, was Madho, the first historically attested
priest of the Gopinath temple. The temples architectural style has been
pronounced similar to that of Madan Mohan.35
    The foundation of the temple of Radhaballabh at Vrindavan (70 bighas)
was ascribed to Harivans, and, as previously noted, it is almost certain that
he is the same as Harbans, the recipient of an imperial grant in village
Dosaij in January 1576 (Doc. No, 4, at 11(a) (i) (4)).36 The temple of
Radhaballabh had its grant (70 bigha) allotted out of the land previously
granted in Dosaij, so that ‘Harbans’, on whom the earlier land-grant was
conferred, could well have been a priest of this temple. The temple is
described by Growse.37



   33 Ibid., pp. 250-3 (with plan and photograph).
   34 There is a temple of Jasoda Nandan at Nandgaon (ibid., p. 315), but the
land-grant of the farman’s Jasodha Nandan was located at Dosaij, within
Vrindavan, making it very unlikely that the receiving temple was at Nandgaon.
   35 Growse, District Memoir., pp. 253-54 (with photograph).
   36 Ibid., pp. 199-200.
   37 Ibid., pp. 254-55, with plan on p. 256. Growse says, on p. 172, that the
temple was built in Jahangir’s time, but this is either erroneous, or else the temple
was partly or wholly rebuilt during that reign.
70                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    The temple of Keshav Rai received its grant (45 bighas out of the
additional grants recommended in 1598) within the limits of the township
of Mathura. It is almost certainly the famous Keshav-Rai temple of that
city, rebuilt by Bir Singh Bundela, and destroyed in 1670 under orders
of Aurangzeb.38 The temple of Nandrai was assigned its grant (out of
the additional quota) of 30 bighas in Nandgram (Nandgaon), so a strong
presumption can be made that it stood at the site of a large temple of the
same name, supposed by Growse to have been built in the mid-eighteenth
century.39
    Finally, there is the pair ‘Gordhan and Hari Gopal Rai’ which had 100
bighas assigned to them from the previously held grants in village Gantoli.
The temple of ‘Gordhan’ is also mentioned in a farman of Akbar of 1588,
which grants exemption from tax on ‘the cows and bulls of Gordhan’,
pasturing in certain villages.40 This was apparently the shrine of Shri Nath
or Govardhandhara founded by Vallabhacharya of Gokul on the ridge of
Govardhan; there was apparently much disputation over its possession
between his followers and those of the Chaitanya sect.41 The temple of
‘Hari Gopal Rai* seems to be the same as the Hari-dev of Govardhan,
said to have been built during Akbar’s reign under the patronage of Raja
Bhagwandas of Amber.42
    On the remaining temples named in the Farman the following notes
can be offered.
    Nandnandan. Growse notices a temple of this name at Nandgaon;43 but
its identification with the one mentioned in Akbar’s farman is unlikely
since its land-grant was assigned at Dosaij within Vrindavan.
   Jugal Kishor (now called Purana Jugal Kishor temple, near Keshi Ghat).
Said to have been built at Vrindavan in 1627, but it is possibly older or was
built on the site of an earlier temple of the same name.44

   38 See Chapter 5.
   39 Growse, pp. 314-15.
   40 Jhaveri, Doc. IIIA.
   41 C£ Growse, District Memoir, pp. 300-301, and Jhaveri s narration of the
traditional accounts of‘Sri Vithalesvara and his Vidvanmandana' at the end of his
Imperial Farmans, etc., pages unnumbered, but pp. 10-12, counting from the
beginning of the account. See also H. Pauwels and E. Bachrach, ‘Aurangzeb an
Iconoclast?’ JRAS, 3rd ser., vol. 28 (3), p. 488 & n., for further references.
   42 Growse, District Memoir, pp. 304-06 (with plan of the temple). But Hari-
dev may also be identified with the temple of Har Rai, assigned 25 bighas in
Govardhan.
   43 Ibid., p. 315.
   44 Ibid., p. 254.
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                     71

   Bihari Jiu. Probably the temple of this name (Bihari Ji also called
Banke Bihari) at Vrindavan, since the grant of 25 bighas to it is assigned
in Dosaij. The present temple of this name is of modern construction.45
   Bhuteshar. The temple of Bhutesvar Mahadev at Mathura.46 The grant
of 25 bighas entirely from the township of Mathura shows its relative
importance in Akbar’s time. Bhuteshwar is shown on maps as a locality on
the north-western skirts of Mathura city.
   Dharu. The assignment of a grant of 8 bighas within the township of
Mathura suggests it was situated in that city, and it must therefore be the
older shrine dedicated to Dhruva Ji whose ruins existed at the time that
Growse wrote.47
   Chaturbhoj. The old temple of Chaturbhoj at Paitha or Petha must be
the one meant since the grant was also assigned in that village.48
   Shaikhsai. The temple was obviously named after the village Shaikhsai
(app. 27° 53’N, 77° 27’E), east of Hodal. The name is derived from Sesasayi
(‘Sessai’ in Growse) ‘where Krishna revealed his divinity by assuming the
emblems of Narayan’.49 Naturally enough its grant of 20 bighas was located
in a village (unidentified) in pargana Hodal.
   Saket Pat. Obviously, a temple at Sanket between Nandgaon and
Barsana, where Krishna and Radha used to meet. The temple must be the
same as the one now called Radha Raman, whose original structure is said
to have been built by Todar Mai in Akbar’s time.50
   Radhakund. One of the two tanks where Krishna is held to have purified
himself after killing the bull Arishta.51 The tank named after Radha has
now given its name to the village, which was called Arith (giving its name
to Arishta, the bull?) till Akbar’s time and much later (see Chapter 8). The
grant of the temple was assigned within this village.
   Barkhan Pur (?). This is undoubtedly the temple dedicated to Brikhbhan
at Barsana,52 where its grant (10 bighas) was situated.




   45 Ibid., p. 217. The original temple was established by Haridas, traditionally
held to be a contemporary of Akbar.
   46 Ibid., pp. 131-32.
   47 Ibid., p. 147.
   48 Ibid, p. 83 n.
   49 Ibid., p. 85.
   50 Ibid., pp. 75, 76 & n.
   51 Ibid., pp. 62, 82-83.
   52 Ibid, p. 311.
72                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    Gordhan. This must have been the temple named Govardhan at
 Mathura, since it has a rather small grant (9 bighas) assigned in that
 township.
    Sankri Khor Ballabh Jiu. There are ‘two little shrines’ at the ravine of
 Sankri Khor near Barsana, one dedicated to Krishna, the other to Radha.53
 One or both of them could be meant.
    A word might be said about the places where the grants were situated,
which were likely to be close to where the temples stood. As the farmdn
 itself indicates, of the total grant of 1000 bighas, an area of 730 bighas lay
 in pargana Mathura; and of this area again as many as 469 bighas were
given from village Dosaij (or Dosaich). This village was later absorbed
into the town of Vrindavan, where its name survives in Dusayat, a quarter
of the city.54 Village Dosaij contained also a hamlet (nagla), within which
too grants were situated. It may be inferred that Dosaij was marked as a
source of grants for the temples of Vrindavan. Temples which have not
otherwise been identified, but whose grants have been assigned to Dosaij,
should therefore be looked for in Vrindavan. These are Jasodha Nandan;
Nand Nandan; Radhakarun Chakamba; Banas Si(?) Thakur; Kalyan Rai;
Radha Jiwan; Radha Krishan; and Har (?) Chand.
    The township of Mathura furnishes 136 bighas of grants, and it may
again be assumed that temples obtaining grants there were situated
within Mathura town. Of the other two villages in pargana Mathura from
which grants were assigned, Raj pur is to the south of Vrindavan and is
now practically its suburb; and Dhaulera (Dhaurera) is situated between
Vrindavan and Mathura.
    Next to pargana Mathura, pargana Sahar contributed 215 bighas of
land in grants. The villages where grants were located are Gantoli, a few
miles south-west-west of Govardhan; Sonrakh, about three miles west
of Vrindavan; Nandgram (Nandgaon); Barsana; Chak Sauli; and Arith.
We have not been able to locate Dokan. Arith furnished a grant of only
10 bighas, but relating to this village we happen to have a number of
documents from Akbar’s reign, arising out of Jiv Goswamis acquisitions
of land there. These show (e.g. the sale-deed of 1579 already referred to
earlier in respect of the identity of Gopaldas) that Arith was then the
proper name of the present village of Radhakund, its then emerging alias.
But by Growses time, the earlier name, which recalled Aristha, the bull
slain by Krishna, had completely disappeared; and now Aring is popularly


  53 Ibid., p. 314.
  54 See Growses list of the ‘mohallas’ of Vrindavan (p. 271).
                    THE BRAJ HEARTLAND, 1595-1690
                                                                                  77*30
            ®Urnra^'                                                6handaal>



    Pihang*nn              Sfsru
                                                         Modal

                                                              hCikhsa




                                             Nonera
                                                         Bathain


                                                                     DeotSn

                                                              Jao
                                                                                       Chhata
                                             • •' Nandgaon*
                                                                                                     Be Sdi Buz arg


                                   nd m an
                                                  ; Hs‘ln*'-t A                                         Sei
                                                 I   BarSana               Rabera
                                                 ;     »                                        Akbarpur
                                             Chaksaub*                           Sahar
                                                                              &
                                                                                                       Atast
                                                                                                                      • segan'tp'jf
                                                                                                       urirakh              •Mc$nsaf<^*<
                                                                                                           tdg         ■Wrindavan
                                                                                                             Rajpur
                                                                            Kunjera                         kraur
                                                      G opalp jjr v                                                       era
                                                                                 Arithf Radhokunrf                        •Paharwa
                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                         >rti?Sakitr^                                                  21
                                                                                                 /e>* •Satava
                                                                         tatipuro                 ‘'-.MATHURA

                                                                                                     Mahelifij
                                                                      slP»th<i                       \ Aurangabad             ha ban

                                                                                                                Koe Id*



                                                                                                Mango Ita
                                        Slnstni                                                 S(Maghora)                Jb Qnaipur

       Ha them nr




                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                       1(
                                                      Heiak
                                                      0                                                                      77^5'
                                                                              77^3tf
                                                                                                        Paiz Habib
Mughal K<j* PiHar   fl
                                                               Mughal Agfa-Delhi High'*'3* -
Sortor boundary
                                                               Pargana Boundary
         H«od^vart*cs BT
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                73

considered to be the place (by a most unconvincing etymology) where the
bull met his end?5
    A small grant of 20 bighas was made at Manuhu (?), an unidentified
village in pargana Hodal, presumably close to Shaikhsai; and there
were two villages in pargana Mangotla receiving grants, viz., Gordhan
(Govardhan) and Petha.
    The places where the identified temples stood and the villages where
they obtained grants (to the extent located) are shown in our Map 3. (The
Map also shows townships and villages mentioned in later documents.)


                                     VI

 It may seem a digression from the main theme of this chapter, but
 comments seem called for on information that our documents provide
 on some matters of administrative history. Those familiar with the A ’in-i
Akbari may have noticed that it lists i/(wr«r-circles under various sarkdrs
 or divisions of subas (provinces), these circles being groups of contiguous
parganas assigned the same revenue-rates (dasturu'l ‘amals) on various
crops. It is not precisely established how each of these revenue-circles
came to be formed. In sarkdr Agra, there were three such circles: Agra,
Bayana, and Etawa. Mathura and the surrounding parganas belonged
not to the circle of Agra, but to that of Bayana.56 The reason for this
is now found in our Doc. No. 1 (of ad 1565), which shows Mathura to
have then belonged to the sarkdr of Bayana, not Agra. The dastilr-circle
must, therefore, have been framed before this sarkdr was dissolved and
absorbed in sarkdr Agra. When the latter event occurred, the revenue rates
previously enforced could not be altered, so that Bayana had to continue
with Mathura and the other parganas grouped under its name, as a dastur-
circle separate from that of Agra.
    Doc. No. 4, of 1598, sheds some light on the pargana boundaries of the
time, since it mentions the parganas to which the villages belonged where
the grants were assigned. Thus, the limits of pargana Sahar came up to
the doorstep of Vrindavan, since Sonrakh was in that pargana. Similarly,
‘Gordhan’ (Govardhan) belonged to pargana Mangotla, but both Arith
to its east and Gantoli to its west belonged to pargana Sahar. To the
south-west of Mathura, Maholi was the headquarters of another pargana.
This meant that pargana Mathura must have been rather small, its limits

  5i Growse, District Memoir, pp. 62, 83 & n., 381.
  56 Ain, vol. I, p. 356.
74                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 not extending beyond Vrindavan to the north, and Yamuna in the east,
 bordering Maholi in the south and falling well short of Govardhan to the
 west.5758
     The earliest document known thus far, which uses the term jagir or
jagirdar (for territorial revenue-assignment or its holder) is a farmdn of
 Akbar, dated 1 'Rabi’ I 967/1 December 1559, in the possession of the
 late Maulana Raza Ansari of Farangi Mahal, Lucknow (photocopy in the
 library of the Department of History of AMU). This gives the spelling
jaigirdar not jagirdar, as in later documents. This form of spelling is
 important as it indicates that the term had recently come into use, with
 the form jaigirdar clear in the writers’ minds. Our Document No. 1 (of
January 1565) too gives us the earlier form of the spelling (jaigir), while
 it is not found in any of the later documents, which simply employ the
 shortened formja^fr.
     There is a reference in Doc. No. 1 to the ‘Rule of Half ’ (tarlq-i mundsifa)
 which applied when a revenue-grant was conferred for the first time. The
farmdn also makes clear what these words meant, viz., that half of the
 area of the grant was to be given in cultivated land (mazritj and half in
 waste (ufiadd). This practice was inherited from the Sur administration,
 and the rule is specifically set out in the A’ln-i Akbarl.™ Our Doc. No.
 1 shows that it was being applied as a matter of course in 1565 and so
 confirms our other evidence to the same effect. It will be seen that Doc.
 No. 4 (issued in 1598) does not apply this rule to grants held from the
 past, since the grantees were expected to have extended cultivation once
 they had obtained land under the grant. But in the case of the new or
  additional’ grants the ‘Rule of Half’ {‘Bij Mundsifa1) is insisted upon
 in both Docs. Nos. 4 and 5. The rule thus remained sturdily in force
 throughout Akbar’s reign.
     Farmdns of revenue-grants normally contained lists of taxes, cesses, etc.,
 from which the grantees were exempted. Our Docs. 1, 4, and 5 have lists
 similar to those in other such documents. Since these have been discussed
 by earlier editors of similar documents, notably by B.N. Goswamy and J.S.




   57 Since pargana Sahar belonged to sarkar Sahar, these particulars would
require a redrawing of the Agcu-sarkdr boundary north of Mathura, bringing it
southwards, much closer to that town than it is in Irfan Habib, Atlas of the
Mughal Empire, New Delhi, 1982, Sheet 8A.
   58 The evidence is discussed in Habib, Agrarian System, 1st ed., p. 302; 3rd
ed., pp. 346-47,
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                   75

Grewal, the need to discuss them here is obviated.59 The one term which
earlier editors do not seem to have discussed, but which all of our three
documents contain and which is also found in many other documents of
Akbar’s reign as well, is savart. Tek Chand ‘Bahar’ in his famous dictionary,
Bahar-i ‘Ajam (c. 1740), says it meant gifts and presents, and points out
that it occurs in Yazdis Zafarndma (History of Timur).60 Significantly
enough, all three of our documents group savart with two other terms of
the same meaning, qunalgha and peshkasb, though this may not necessarily
be the case in other grants of Akbar’s reign.
   One final digression, in the interest of a special curiosity: Todar Mais
seal on Doc. No. 3, dated 1584, reads: ‘Todar Mai, Banda-i Dargdh, Ram
Ki Panah\ thus expressing both his loyalty to Akbar, and his allegiance to
Rama, the latter in a Hindi phrase. This seal with the same text was seen
in ifarman of Akbar, dated 4 Rabi‘ II 983/13 July 1575.61 That Akbar
permitted the use of such a seal on his own farman as early as mid-1570’s
is once again proof that his possible shift to orthodox Islam at that time
was not made at the expense of religious tolerance.




   59 B.N. Goswamy and J.S. Grewal, The Mughals and the Jogis ofjakhbar, Simla,
1967, notes to the translations of documents, passim.
  60 Tek Chand ‘Bahar’, Bahar-i ‘Ajam, litho, ed., Nawal Kishor, Lucknow,
1916, s.v. savart.
  61 Examined by Irfan Habib when its owner, Mr. Mohd Akbar Ali, Vakil,
Gorakhpur, lent it to the Department of History, Aligarh Muslim University, in
1960s. A transcript (but unfortunately not a photograph) is preserved in the
Department of History Library.
76                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

                 Appendix 1: The Documents



1. Imperial Grant to Gopaldas, 1565. Farmdn (VRI. Madan
Mohan 55)

                              TRANSLATION
                        [Invocation: portion damaged]

[Title:] Farmdn of Jalalu’ddln Muhammad Akbar Padshah Ghazi
[Round Seal:] ‘Jalalu’ddln Muhammad Akbar Padshah...Ghazi’, [with
names of his ancestors encircling the Emperors name].

    Now, the sublime obedience-exacting Farmdn has been issued that
from [this] date the area of two hundred bighas (200 bighas), [half whereof
is] 100 bighas^ half cultivated and [half] waste, under the rule of‘Half,’
from village Bindraban, withinpargana Matura, sarkar Bayana, be assigned
as (in dm) to Obedient-to-Islam Gopaldas. The jaigirdars,62   63 amin, diwan,
revenue-collectors famils), chaudhuris and qdnungos of the said pargana
are required to consider [the grant] as assigned in this manner, and,
measuring and demarcating the said land, to leave it in his possession, and
not to trouble him on account of land-revenue, imposts and levies such
as presents, viz, qunalgfaa, peshkash and savari, survey-fee, collectors levy,
superintendents cess (daroghgana), the 5-per-cent levy (dah-nim), the two
per-cent levy of the qanungo, forced labour (begar), game (shikar), cattle­
tax (gdu-shumdri), and all fiscal claims and royal taxes. They are not to
demand a farmdn or parwdncha (official order) in this matter every year.
Written, 5 Jumada II, 972 [8 January 1565].


                                    Reverse
                                    [Zimn]
                                                                 [Round Seal]
                                                               (Undeciphered)



   62 The figure ‘200 bighas’ in raqam notation written above the words, and ‘100
bighas’ written underneath.
   63 Note the spelling Jaigirdar, an early form, instead ofjagirdar.
Akbar’s Jarman confiming Jiv Gosa’in in position as Custodian of
Madan Mohan and Govind-dev temples, 1568 (facsimile)
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region               77

[Two endorsements, largely covered now by paper pasted over them]
[1.]... dated
[2.] on... written.....



2. Grant of Right of Management of Temples. Farmdn in
favour of Jiv Gosain, 1568 (VRI, Acc. No. 1).

                              TRANSLATION
                        [Invocation:] He (God) is Rich

[Title:] Farmdn of Jalalu’ddin Muhammad Akbar Padshah Ghazi
[Round Seal:]

            Jalalu’ddin Muhammad Akbar Padshah Ghazi 967

    Whereas Deserving-of-Favour-and-Kindness, Raja Todar Mai, has
represented to the Imperial Court that Jiv6465  Gosain is a poor man and
                                               66
prays for the well-being of His Majesty, the World-subduing Sun-like
Order has issued forth that the adhikar (management) of the devalas
(temples) of Madan Mohan and Gobind Dev, which are situated in the
village of Bindraban, should be firmly vested in him in the same manner
as Rup Gosa’in has also bestowed it on him. In accordance with his
solicitation, the sublime fate-directing farmdn is [further] being issued
that since the offerings (khairat) of the said idol-temple are deemed to
belong to the aforenamed, no one else should be held to be, or be made,
a partner or co-sharer with him therein; and to whomever in his lifetime,
he would hand over the offerings aforesaid, that person will continue to
obtain the offerings after the demise of Jiv Gosa’in. The commanders,
revenue-collectors, jagirddrs, vakils (agents), chaudurisf qdnungos,
headmen (muqaddamari), and all cultivators (muzdri'dri) of Bindraban are
required to act in conformity with the Imperial order, and regard whatever
comprises the offerings aforesaid as belonging to the aforenamed, and
consider obedience ...A [to this order as a charge upon] themselves. They
should recognise all fiscal claims and royal taxes as remitted and cancelled
[in respect of the rights granted], and should not demand a new farmdn



   64 ‘Jiv* in Persian writing can also be read ‘JTu.
   65 So spelt.
   66 Words not decipherable.
78                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

or official order (parwancha) every year in respect of this matter. Written,
dated 14 Rabi1 II 976 [6 October 1568].

[zfzmn:]
   [Titles] the Sadr of elevated status [further titles] Shaikh ‘Abdun
   Nabi, Shaikhu’l Islam.
   [Round Seal:] Illegible
   [Round Seal:] Illegible. [Note:] Dated, 25 Rabi' II 97[6]
   [Round Seal:] ... A’la ... [Note:] Written, Dated 22 Rabi II 97[6]
   [Round Seal:] Illegible. 28 Rabi II 976 [?]
   [Round Seal:] Debidas [?], slave of....
   [Note:] Information received. Dated 29 Rabi' II [ 21 October]
                                                                ♦


3. Todar Mais grant to Gopaldas, 1584. Parwancha. (VRI,
Radhakund 154, Show-case).

                               TRANSLATION
[Invocation] He (God)!
   Udaichand is informed that an area of one hundred bighas of land,
cultivated as khwud-kashta, in village Raj pur alias Bilu, within Pargana
Matura, has been assigned by way of charity-gift (khairdt) to Gopaldas,
sevak (servant) of the devdla of Sri Madan Mohan67 with effect from the
beginning of the ^ari/Tiarvest of Qui 11 [Year of the Sheep] Rabi1 of Biehl
11 [Year of the Ape], (the entire year).68 Let them [the officials] measure
and demarcate the land aforesaid and give it into the possession of the
aforenamed, and not demand a new parwancha (official order) every year.
Let them see the necessity of care in this matter. Written, dated Rabi1 II
992 [12 April - 10 May 1584]

[Round Seal:]
  Todar Mai, Slave of the Court.
  Under the protection of Ram!69

   67 The name Madan Mohan is written above the top of the text, some blank           ,
space being left after ‘Sri* in the text that follows. This was a recognised way of
showing respect.
   68 Words within round brackets inserted later.
   69 Hindi phrase Ram ki Panah written in Arabic characters. There is the
interesting linguistic fact that panah, a Persian word, is assigned a feminine
gender (so preceded by ki not kd) in conformity with later Hindustani usage.
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                79

[Endorsement on margin:]
  It is established that next year a newparwancha would not be demanded.


4. Grants to Thirty-five Temples of Mathura and environs,
1598. Farman issued to Gobind Dev Temple, etc.

Note: The translation follows the text of the original/arman in the National
Archives of India, NAI-2671 (1) (our ‘A’). Wherever ‘A* is damaged or
undecipherable, the text of an early copy in VRI (‘B’)70 has been used.
It will be seen that a substantial part of the main text of the farman
can be read only with the help of ‘B’, such readings being put within
round brackets by us, the closing bracket being marked with an asterisk.*
But the most important portion of the document, the zimn, is very well
preserved in the original (‘A’). Wherever ‘A’ is clear, the variations (or
omissions) in ‘B’ are not noted, since ‘B’ is merely a copy of‘A’.

                            TRANSLATION
                        [Invocation:] God is Great!
[Round Seal:] Jalalu’ddin Muhammad Akbar Padshah. Names of the
Emperor’s ancestors encircling his name with that of Amir Timur Sahib
Qiran at the top,
[Title] Farman of Jalalu’ddin Muhammad Akbar Padshah Ghazi.
    Now, the sublime (obedience-exacting)* farman has been issued
from the Abode of Kindness and Favour (to the effect that as from the
beginning of the kharif of It 11 [year of the Dog]),* an area of one hundred
and thirty-five bighas of land from the mahals specified on the Reverse
(Zimn), in accordance with the details given at the back, shall be attached
to the devalas (temples) of Gobind Rai, etc., and no one else’s name
shall be interposed therein. It should be assigned (for the livelihood of
the company, jama at)* who dedicate themselves to the service of those
devalas so that employing its income (hasilat) year after year for their own
living expenses they may (in contentment and ease engage themselves in
praying)* for the eternal life of this ever more prosperous State and its
ever-lasting glory. The honoured persons of authority, karoris, jagjrdars
and high officers, present and future, of the said mahals [parganas] are
required to measure out (the said area from those mahals)* and demarcating
it hand it over [to the grantees], and deeming them exempt from the land­

   70 Govind-dev Collection, apparently not numbered.
80                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

revenue and cesses, imposts and levies, all fiscal claims and royal taxes such
as qunalgha, peshkash and savart, (surveyor’s fee, fee for the seal of the sadr,
etc, annual measurement-levy),* collectors fee, [levy in lieu of] insistence
on cultivation, two-per-cent levy of the qanungo, the demarcation-fee,
and such other [imposts], such being remitted and abrogated, they are to
desist from imposing them. They ought (to exert themselves in putting
into effect this order, and not to allow any change or alteration in its
terms: nor should they demand a. farmdn or official order every year).*
Written (19th day of the Ilahi month of Shahrlwar 43rd Year Ilahi)* [11
September 1598].

                              [Reverse = Zimn]

    Text of the Taliqa [Note], dated the thirteenth of the Ilahi month
Amurdad year 43 [5 August 1598], concerning the land of the devala-
temples of Matura, Bindraban, Gordhan, Nandgram, etc: [His Majesty]
ordered His Enlightened Excellency (titles) ‘Allami Shaikh Abu’l Fazl
that, in consultation with Batacharaj [Bhattacharya], Chintaman Bhat,
Upendar Misr, and Bhat (?) Pandit, he should propose how much land
should be granted appropriately to each devala. They established three
categories (shiqq), viz., first, second, and third. This [proposal] was placed
before the Sacred Presence [Emperor] on Sunday the 24th of Ilahi month
of Khurdad, Year 43 [14 June 1598], during the chauki [watch-duty] of
His Excellency (titles) the ‘Allami aforesaid [Shaikh Abu’l Fazl], and
during the time the proceedings were being recorded by Mu‘izzu’ddin
Husain and Khwaja Ramrai Surajdaj: Category II, by which the grant was
proposed of one thousand bighas of land, viz., five hundred bighas already
granted and five hundred bighas additional, conferred by way of Ma ash
(‘Livelihood’), was approved, so that this land, in accordance with the
details that follow, should be attached to those devalas, and no one else’s
name should be interposed therein. The company (jama at) who dedicate
themselves to the service of those temples should, possessing themselves
of its income, employ it for their living expenses and engage themselves in
praying for the long life of this ever-lasting State. [To be of effect] from
the beginning of kharif harvest, It II. By report (risdla) of His Excellency
(titles) Mubarizu’ddin A‘zam Khan, and through and during the chauki
(guard-duty) of His Excellency (titles) Ramdas Kachhwaha, and while
the proceedings were being recorded (waqta navisi) by Khwajagi Tahir
Muhammad. Text of margin-endorsement in the hand of the Recorder
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                   81

of Proceedings (Wdqta Navis): [This] is according to the Record of
Proceedings.

35 Devdlas
[Grants] made in accordance with details below.

[I] 71 1000 bighas                                                      Bighas
                                                         Devdlas       assigned
 [A] In Pargana Matura                                     24            730
                                           Bighas
                             Devdlas      assigned
Township of Matura              6            136
Village Dosaij, etc.           17           469
Village Rajpur                  -             85
Village Dhaulcra                1            40

[B] In Pargana Sahar, etc.                                 11            270
                                            Bighas
                             Devdlas       assigned
Pargana Sahar                   8            215
Pargana Hodal                   1             20
Pargana Mangotla                2             35

[II] [A] [Previously granted] in accordance with^zrwdnj                   530
         Less deduction (qusur) for [difference between]                 - 26
         rope and bamboo rod
                                                               504
[i] Farman dated month of Shawwal year 983 [January 1576] to Gordhan
    and Company of... [?] by report (risdla) of Shahbaz Khan
    Five persons          160 bighas
    Bighas [now] assigned
    [Note:] The persons mentioned below have died.
[1] Gordhan, 40 bighas according to Farman,
    in village Dosaij, [now] assigned                           35
[2] Kishandas, 40 bighas, ditto, [now] assigned:                25




   71 For convenience of reference different parts of the Zimn have been numbered
and sub-numbered. Not being in the original document, these are placed within
square brackets.
82                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

[3] B hag wan, in the same village72 40 bighas, [now] assigned:            25
[4] Harbans, 100 bighas, [now] assigned:                                   40
[5] Ramdas, in village Dhaulera, 100 bighas, [now] assigned:               35

[ii] Farman dated 5 Jumada II, Year 972 [8 Janurary 1565]               Bighas
      To Gopaldas by report of Raja Bharmal, in Pargana
      Matura73                                                            200
[iii] Farman dated 28 Ziqad Year 987 [16 January 1580]
      to Ramdas, by report of Raja Birbar [Birbal] in village
      Gan to li, pargana Sahar. Dead                                      100
[iv] Farman, dated 4 Rajab Year 983 [9 October 1576]
      To Chain Gopal, by report of Shahbaz Khan,
      Parwanchas of Qazi Khan and Raja B hag wandas,
      In village Loma Ka Nagar (?) in Pargana Matura. Dead                 70

[B] [The above] now confirmed, in the following manner upon seven
      devalas
                                 7 Devalas
                     Assigned: 500 bighas by gaz-i Ilahl
                                                               Bighas
[i] Devala of Madan Mohan, in Villages of Pargana Matura
      120 Bighas
      Village Dosaij                                              35
      Village Rajpur                                              85
[ii] Devala of Gobind Rai, in Nagla Dosaij, Pargana Matura        70
[iii] Devala of Gopinath, in Nagla Dosaij, Pargana Matura         70
[iv] Devala of Radha Ballabh in village Dosaij, Pargana Matura    70
[v] Devala of Akrur, village Dhaulera, Pargana Matura             40
[vi] Devala of Gordhan and Hari Gopal Rai, in Village Gantoli,
      Pargana Sahar                                              100
[vii] Devala Nandnandan, in Nagla Dosaij, Pargana Matura          30
                                                               [500]

                                                                          Bighas
[III] Additional [Grants] 28 Devalas. Assigned: 500 bighas
      by gaz-i ilahl under [Rule of] ‘Half’ [i.e. half in cultivated
      land, and half in waste]

   72 ‘Same village’ here seems to mean Dosaij, the village named in the previous
two entires.
  73 This is our Doc. No. 1.
               Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region             83

[i]      Devala of Jugal Kishor in village Nagla Dosaij                25
[ii]     Devala of Dwadas Adat, in village Sonrakh, pargana Sahar      35
[iii]    Devala of Radhakarun Chakamba, in village Nagla Dosaij        10
[iv]     Devala of Bihari Jiu, in village Dosaij                       25
[v]      Devala of Banas(?) Thakur, in village Dosaij                  20
[vij     Devala of Radha Rawan, in village Nagla Dosaij                15
[vii]    Devala of Jasodha Nandan, in village Dosaij                   15
[viii]   Devala of Kalyan Rai, in village Nagla Dosaij                 10
[ix]     Devala of Keshav Rai, in township of Matura                   45
[x]      Devala of Bhuteshar, in township of Matura                    25
[xi]     Devala of Dhoru, etc., in township of Matura
         Dharu               8 bighas
         Maha Mohan          7 bighas                                  15
[xii]    Devala of Raghunat[h] in township of Matura                   25
[xiii] Devala of Har Rai, from village Gordhan, pargana Mangotla 25
[xiv] Devala of Chatrbhoj, from village Petha, pargana Mangotla 10
[xv]     Devala of Dokan, in village of the same name, pargana Sahar 10
[xvi] Devala of Shaikhsai, in village Manunho, pargana Hodal           20
[xvii] Devala of Saket Pat, in village Sanas,74 pargana Sahar          10
[xviii] Devala of Radhakund, in village Arith, pargana Sahar           10
[xix] Devala of Nand Rai, in village Nandgram, pargana Sahar           30
[xx]     Devala of Krishan Rai Jalori(?), in village Dosaij,
         pargana Matura                                                10
[xxi] Devala of Radha Jlwan, in village Dosaij                         10
[xxii] Devala of Radha Krishan, in village Dosaij                      12
[xxiii] Devala of Radha Mohan, in village Dosaij                       30
[xxiv] Devala of Har (?) Chand, in village Dosaij                      12
[xxv] Devala of Gornat[h], in township of Matura                       17
[xxvi] Devala of Barkhan Pur (?), in village Barsana,
         pargana Sahar                                                 10
[xxvii] Devala of Gordhan, in township of Matura                        9
[xxviii] Devala of Sankri Khor75 Ballabh Jiu, in village Chak Sauli,
         Pargana Sahar                                                 10
                                                                     [500]
[IV]
       [A] 31 Devalas                                           865 bighas
            Farmans separately prepared as follows:


   74 Thus in ‘B’. Not legible in ‘A’.
   75 Thor1 or ‘Bhor in ‘A*, ‘Khor’ in ‘B’.
84                           Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

                                                                    Bighas
                                                                  assigned
[i] Farman dated Day Shahriwar (4th) of the Uahi month
      of Shahriwar, Year 43, to Devala of Madan Mohan,
      etc. 3 [devdlas]76                                               170
[ii] Farman dated the same to Devala of Gopinath, etc. 6 devdlas       142
[iii] Farman, dated the same, to Devala of Radhaballabh, etc.,
      6 devdlas                                                        182
[iv] Farman, dated the same, to Devala of Keshav Rai, etc.,
      6 devdlas                                                        136
[v] Farman, dated the same, to Devala of Nand Rai, etc.,
      6 devdlas                                                         90
[vi] Farman, dated the same, to Devala of Gordhan and
      Hart Gopal Rai, etc., 4 devdlas                                  145

[B] Balance77
4 Devdlas, by name Gobind Rai, etc., in villages Dosaij, etc., pargana
Matura:                                                          135 bighas
                                                                      Bighas
     Village Dosaij, etc.                                                95
     Village Dhaulera                                                    40
     Of these —
(a) As previously granted according to farmdns cited above. Original
     [grants] [comprising:]                                      110 bighas
[i] Devala, Gobind Rai, in village Nagla Dosaij, as                   Bighas
     granted, comprising original [grant], by farmdns cited above78       70
[ii] Devala Akrur in village Dhaulera, as before in original [grant],
     as cited above79                                                     40
(b) Now additionally granted in village Nagla Dosaij, according to rule of
     ‘half’:                                                      25 bighas
                                                                      Bighas
[i] Devala Krishan Rai Jalori, from village Nagla Dosaij, now
     granted, by rule of‘half’80                                          10
[ii] Devala Radha Rawan, on the same conditions [as preceding]81          15


     76   Our Doc. No. 5.
     77   Indicated by sign for ‘Balance’.
     78   See above II (b) (ii).
     79   See above II (b) (v).
     80   See above III (xx).
     81   Sec above III (vi).
                 Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region             85

  By the report (risald) of His Excellency (titles) Mubarizu’ddin A;zam
Khan, through and during the chauki (watch) of His Excellency (titles)
Ramdas Kachhwaha, and while the proceedings were being recorded
(waqi‘a navist) by Khwajagi (Tahir Muhammad).*82

[Seals:]
   (1)     Khan-i Khanan, disciple (murid) of Akbar Shah, 992 [ah] .
   (2)     Mirza Koka Nawaz (?) Khan, disciple (murid) of Akbar Shah
   (3)     Banda ... (?), slave of Emperor Akbar
   (4)      Slave: Kamaluddin Husain 997 [ah]
   (5)     ... slave of Ruler of the World (Shah-i Jahan)
[Three other seals, impressions not legible]
[Endorsements]
   [Under seal (3):] Informed. 17 month of Shahriwar, Year 43 Ilahi
   [Under seal (5):] Information received. 15 Shahriwar, Year 43 Ilahi
   [On left margin] Dated month of Shahriwar Year 43. Received in office.
[A later (?) endorsement:]83
  Seen 22 Tir Year 21 [11 June 1626]
  Confirmed as per past practice.
  Copy made.


5. Grants to temples of Mathura and Environs, 1598.
Farman to Madan Mohan Temple, etc. Copy. (VRI,
Madan Mohan Collection-2).


 This farman, of which a copy alone is preserved, is the one referred to in
 our Doc. No. 4 at IV (A) (i) in the Zimn.
   A full translation of this document is not needed since the text of the
farman (front portion), and the ta‘liqa in the zimn are the same as in Doc.
 No. 4, with the following points of difference, all in the main text of the
farman:-
     (1) Where Doc. No. 4 has ‘the area of one hundred and thirty-
         five bighas’, [assigned to Govind-dev temple, etc], the present
         document reads ‘the area of one hundred and seventy bighas’.
         (assigned to Madan Mohan temple, etc).

   82 Last name covered by seal in ‘A’. Reading as in ‘B’.
   83 Also copied in ‘B’.
86                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

      (2) Where Doc. No. 4 has ‘the devalas cf Gobind Rai, etc.,’ Doc. No.
          5 reads ‘the devalas of Madan Mohan, etc.’
      (3) The list of taxes and imposts from which the grant was exempt
          reads slightly differently in Doc. No. 5:
             ‘land-revenue, imposts, all fiscal claims and royal taxes, such
             as qunalgha, peshkash and sdvari, [survey-fees viz.] jaribana and
             zabitdna, seal-fee (muhrand), superintendents cess, collectors
             levy, the five-per-cent levy (dahriini), the two-per-cent levy of
             the qanungo, insistence on cultivation, [levy in lieu of| annual
             measurement, demarcation-fee, etc’.
      (4) At the end, just before the date, the following words are added:
             ‘Acting in conformity with what is written above, they should
             put it into effect’.
      (5) The date of the farmdn in Doc. No. 4 is 19th of the Ilahi month
          of Shahriwar Year 43, whereas the present farmdn bears the date
          Shahriwar (4th) day of the Ilahi month of Shahriwar, Year 43,
          which is also confirmed by Doc. No.4, Zimn, IV (A) (i), 4th
          Shahriwar 43 Ilahi = 27 August 1598.
          After the ta'liqa, which, as noted above, is identical with the one
          in Doc. No. 4, the zimn in Doc, No. 5 reads as follows:

           35 devalas
           Assignments made according to the following particulars:
           [Total]                                             1000 bighas
           [Assigned] by farmans to [devala] Gobind Rai, & c.,
            prepared separately                                  830 bighas
           Balance:
           To [devala] Madan Mohan, &. c., 3 devalas, assigned 170 bighas

      [1] Devala Madan Mohan, in pargana Mathura,84 as previously held
          through original [grant] by farmdns cited above84
                                                         85 120 bighas
          Village Dosaij                                     35 bighas
          Village Rajpur                                     85 bighas
      [2] Devala Dwadas Adat, & c. [Now] assigned             50 bighas
          (i) Devala Dwadas Adat, in village Sonrakh,
              pargana Sahar, under [rule of] ‘half’86         35 bighas


     84 So spelt in the copy.
     85 See Doc. No. 4, Zimn, II (B) (1).
     86 See Doc. No. 4, Zimn, III (ii).
                 Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region             87

           (ii) Devala Jasodha Nandan, in village Dosaij,
                pargana Mathura, under [rule of] ‘half’87         15 bighas


6. Grant to Madan Mohan Temple etc., 1598. Sadrs order
(VRI. Madan Mohan Collection 58).

                                TRANSLATION
From the Diwan of the Exalted Office of the Sadr
The agents of Karoris and Jagirdars, present and future.... [are informed
that?]88 the area of one hundred and seventy [170: half, 85] bighas of
land, by gaz-i ilahi, has been assigned, according to the particulars in the
zimn, by sublime farmdn, impressed with the Imperial seal, by way of
ma ash to the company that serves the devala of Madan Mohan, etc. They
[the officials] are required to act according to the world-directing Jarman,
and, leaving it [the land] in possession of the said company, commit no
interference at all therein. They should let ... [the grantees enjoy] the
income [from the land, so that] they may engage themselves [in praying
for] the long life of the Imperial state. Let them exert themselves fully in
this matter.
[Two seals:]
1) [On right margin near bottom:] The humble slave: Sadr Jahan al-
   Husaini 998 [ah « 1589-90].
2) [Between last two lines:] .... Slave of the slave-nourishing King
   Akbar.
                                [Zimn]
   [Much covered by pasted slips and so difficult to make sense of lower
   portion]
   Assigned according to the farmdn.,,,
   [3] 5 Devalas
   1000 bighas
   [Of which assigned to] devala Madan Mohan, & c., according to
   following particulars:
   [Total]                                                  [170] bighas




     87 See Doc. No. 4, Zimn, III (vii).
     88 Text damaged here.
88                                Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

     Pargana Matura                                                                                       135 bighas
            Village Dosaij                              50 bighas
            Village Rajpur                              85 bighas
     [Pargana] Sahar
     ... village [Sonrakh]                                                                                   35 bighas
     .......................................................................................................... 120bighas
     Pargana Matura, in village..... Pargana [Sahar] [village] Sonrakh ....
     Devala Madan Mohan, [village] Dosaij                                                                    35 bighas
     [Devala] ..... according to [the rule of] ‘Half’                                                    [35 bighas]
     Pargana Sahar, according to [the rule of] ‘Half’                                                       35 bighas
     Devala Jasoda Nandan, in village Dosaij, pargana
     Matura, according to [the rule of] ‘Half’                                                              15 bighas

[Note at bottom written downside up:]
 Seen, dated 31 month of Shahriwar Yr. 43 [23 September 1598]
              Akbar and the Temples of the Mathura Region                 89


                 Appendix 2: The Forgeries

NOTE ON TWO FORGED ‘FARMANS OF AKBAR

1.  VRI, Acc. No. 2, purports to be & farman of Akbar granting 70 bighas
    of land ‘pukhta’, without deduction on account of the measuring rod,
    to Rup Gosain, with sons, generation after generation, in the environs
    of ‘Mominabad’. Dated 1st Sha'ban 16 ry. Hijri.
        Several seals and endorsement on the back, one endorsement
    dated 947(1). The main endorsement is in the name of Sadrus Sudur
    Shuja'at Khan.
       The farman is an obvious forgery. It uses the name Mominabad
    for Bindraban, the latter being the form of its name in use in Akbar’s
    time, while the name 'Mominabad’ was given to the place only in
    Aurangzeb’s reign (1659-1707). The deduction on account of the
    measuring rod could be instituted only after the bamboo-rod was
    introduced in Akbar’s 19th ry, so that there was no question of it
    being so mentioned in the 16th ry The word ‘pukhta’, in the sense
    of the larger bigha was not in use in the sixteenth century. There was
    no Sadrus Sudur of Akbar by the name of Shuja at Khan. While the
   farman is put in Akbar’s 18th ry (1571-2), an endorsement is dated
   ah 947 or ad 1544-5, when the Surs were ruling over the territory!
    The indifferent quality of the writing in the title of tughrd, with even
    the kdfstroke in Akbar’s name missing, shows it could not have come
    from the Imperial chancery. Finally, Akbar’s court used the Hijri
    calendar without reference to his regnal years, until the Ilahi calendar
    replaced Hijri dates, and so no official document of Akbar’s time
    could bear a regnal year with a Hijri month.
2. VRI, Acc. No. 36, purporting to be zfarman of Akbar, recalling a grant
    of 200 bighas pukhta, in the environs of 'Brindaban alias Mominabad
    in the sarkdr and suba of the Capital Akbarabad’, allegedly made in
    the 3rd ry, and recognising its transfer by gift (fiba) by Rup Gosain
    to his ‘brother’ Jiv Ji ‘with sons’. Dated 5 Zil'hijj 14 ry corresponding
    to 955 ah. Jiv Gosa’in was, of course, not a brother but a nephew of
   Rup Gosa’in.
       The zimn gives endorsement of Sadru’s Sudur Shuja'at Khan, with
   other seals and endorsements, all bearing the year 14.
       The forgery is proclaimed by the place-names Mominabad and
   Akbarabad. The former name was given by Aurangzeb to Vrindavan,
90                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

     and the latter by Shahjahan to Agra. The word pukhta as defining a
     unit of measure too is alien to documents of Akbar’s reign. There
     were no subas in Akbar’s 14th ry, and, as already noted, Akbar had
     no Sadru’s Sudur of the name or title of Shuja‘at Khan. The year
     955 ah, and Akbar’s 14th ry do not correspond, 5 Zfl hijj 955 being
     5 January 1549, seven years before Akbar came to the throne. The
     tughra or title is fairly well written, but by mistake omits the name
     Akbar, thus missing out the vital name! The seal, with names of
     Akbar’s ancestors, seems similarly to have been copied from a genuine
     one. The use of Akbar’s regnal year with Hijri month would alone be
     enough to proclaim it a forgery, since Akbar’s regnal years were not
     used until the Ilahi calender was adopted later in his reign.
        There is a copy of this forgery, without the zimn, in VRI’s
     Radhadamodar temple collection, Doc. No. 81.
                             CHAPTER 4



     The Mughal Administration and
   the Temples of Vrindavan during the
     Reigns of Jahangir and Shahjahan
                Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib




In this chapter we continue the examination of the documents from
Vrindavan (for which, see Introduction) by taking up those belonging to
the reigns of Jahangir (1605-27) and Shahjahan (1628-58). We present
here a calendar of over forty-five Persian documents of the two reigns,
shedding light on the relations between the Mughal administration and
the temples of Vrindavan. As in the case of our study of Akbar and the
Temples of the Mathura Region [Chapter 3] a set of ‘private’ documents
such as sale-deeds have been here excluded. These will largely be dealt
with in chapters 7, 8, and 9 of this volume.


                                      I

 We may recollect that Akbar enlarged and consolidated grants to
 temples and their priests in the Mathura region by his farmdns of 4 and
 19 Shahriwar 43 Ilahi year (27 August and 11 September 1598), which
 accounted for a total grant of 1000 bighas of land to thirty-five temples in
Vrindavan and Mathura, and their environs. The temples to which fresh
 grants were issued in 1598 were put in seven groups, for each of which a
 separate farmdn was issued. Details of these were brought together in the
farmdn for the Govind-dev temple and three other temples issued on 19
 Shahriwar. Since our documents come from the two groups of Vrindavan
 temples, Madan Mohan etc. (assigned 170 bighas) and Govind-dev etc.
 92                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  (assigned 135 bighas), we are unable to trace the history of the grants of
  the other groups; but the Vrindavan documents show fairly well what
  happened in the case of these two groups of temples.
     Under Jahangir the grants continued to be honoured; as may be seen
  from doc. No. 3 in the calendar annexed to this chapter (being Ftibar
  Khan's parwdna of 1608), confirming the grants to Govind-dev and three
  other named temples strictly in conformity with Akbars farmdn. A Sadrs
 parwdna of 1614 was issued to the same effect (Doc. No. 10). The grant
  to the Madan Mohan temple also continued unaffected, since it was
  confirmed exactly in terms of Akbar’s farmdn by a farmdn of Shahjahan
 of 4 Azur 6 ry (26 November 1633), itself not extant, but cited in Docs.
 Nos. 19 and 36, A nishan of Dara Shukoh issued in 1658 (Jhaveri XI)
 implies that Jahangir confirmed in favour of Girdhar the grant of the
 village of Gokul that Akbar had conferred on the latter’s father Bithal Rai
 (Vittalnath).
     Jahangir himself added to Akbar’s grants. By his farmdn of 14 Aban
 8 ry (7 November 1613) (Doc, No. 9) he converted Raja Todar Mais
 grant (as jagirddr) of 100 bighas (‘by bamboo rod’), conferred in 1584
 on Gopaldas, the sevak of the Madan Mohan temple, into an Imperial
 grant. The equivalent area by gaz-i ilahi being 89 bighas, 9 biswas (1 bigha
 = 20 biswas), the grant was now made permanent in favour of Srichand,
 Gopaldas’ successor as sevak of that temple. This meant that it was no
 longer resumable by any jagirdar.
     Further, Jahangir added at least two temples to the list of the thirty-
 five already supported by Akbar’s grant of 1598. Through Doc. No. 4, a
farmdn of February 1612, he granted 10 bighas to the sevak of the temple
 Thakur Dwara (Thakurduara) at Vrindavan, and by No. 7, a farmdn of
 April 1613, he granted 15 bighas to the sevak of Thakur Bhoj(?) Sundar,
 a temple in Basahi (Basai) Buzurg in pargana Sahar, near Mathura. In
 addition, he issued a number of grants to individuals of which chance
 records have survived in the Vrindavan archives:

               TABLE 4.1. Grants Issued to Individuals by Jahangir

 Grantee                                   Area of Grant       Document
 (a) (1) Kamdev Acharya                      bighas 12           No .5
     (2) Narayan Das                         bighas 12
 (b) Bindrabandas and Nand La‘l              bighas 50          No. 6
 (c) Swamidas, Brahman                       bighas 20          No. 8
 (d) Shyam Kishan                            bighas 15         No. 11
 (e) Kunjdasi (woman) and Damodar(?)         bighas 50         No. 13A
        The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan             93

   Except for (b) and (c), all the above grants were assigned out of
pargana Sahar whose limits came close to Mathura and Vrindavan. Grant
(b) was made in a village of pargana Mathura. Grant (c) was assigned
in a pargana of sarkar Udambar (Tanda) in suba Bengal, which reminds
us of the affiliation between Bengal and the devotees of the temples of
Govind-dev and Madan Mohan. It may be noted that the formula 'with
sons’ indicated that the grant would not lapse on the death of the named
grantee, but would continue to be vested with his sons, up to a half of
the area.1 It was, therefore, a way of indicating special favour. Grant (e),
made to a woman Kunjdasi (30 bighas), along with Damodar (20 bighas), is
remarkable, looking at the sex of the first grantee. In any case, the number
ofJahangirs grants to individuals which we find almost incidentally among
our documents are in conformity with the reputation of great liberality in
this respect that he came to acquire.1
                                     23
                                      4
   None of the grants appear to be connected with Jahangirs own visit to
Vrindavan in 14th RY (1620), which he paid specifically to see its temples.
His impressions were not altogether favourable:

During the reign of His Majesty Emperor Akbar, Rajput nobles erected buildings
(of the temples) in their own style and decorated them profusely from outside.
But inside there were so many bats and owls that owing to their bad smells one
could not breathe?

   Among the temples built by ‘Rajput nobles’, Jahangir must have visited
the temple of Govind-dev, whose building was constructed by Raja Man
Singh of Amber, as recorded in an inscription? Man Singh committed
himself to a daily payment of Rs.5 and then, from 1608, of Rs.9, for the
temple. Of the latter sum Rs.8 were to be spent on the upkeep of the
temple, and Re.l on the maintenance of its sevak Haridas (Doc. No. 2).
Owing to their initial expenditure on the building of the Govind-dev
temple and regular financial support, the Amber family remained closely
interested in its management—a position of which they were to obtain
Imperial recognition during the reign of Shahjahan.


   1 Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, 1st ed. Bombay, 1963,
pp. 305-06 & n. 35 on p. 306; 3rd. ed., New Delhi, 2014, pp. 349-528 nn.
   2 Ibid., 1st ed., p. 311 & n.
   3 Jahangir, Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, ed. Sayyid Ahmad, Ghazipur and Aligarh,
1863-64, p. 279.
   4 F.S. Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir, 1882, reprint, New Delhi, 1979,
pp. 243-4.
94                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    The temple of Govind-dev had another visitor, Mahmud Balkhi, in
 1625. He refers to it as having been built by Raja Man Singh [spelt:
‘Manak Sing’], ‘a noble of King Akbar’. He speaks of its large idol of black
stone and great gong, and of the crowds of men and women that came and
listened to the sermons of Brahmans and the sounds of music.5
    The temple of Madan Mohan (‘Madan Gopal’) was also supported by
financial aid from Rajput nobility. For example, there was the jagirddr
of Jewar, who assigned its sevaks an annual payment of Rs.60 in 1607,
reiterating the obligation in 1621 (Docs. Nos. 1 and 12). Unfotunately,
the jagirddr cannot be identified, but Jewar, out of whose revenues the
payment was to be made, was the seat of a pargana of sarkdr Delhi,
situated east of the Yamuna.6
    Incidentally, Jahangir describes in his Memoirs his meetings with the
Vedantic ascetic, Gusain Jadrup (Chitrarupa), with great enthusiasm.
First, he met him at Ujjain while on his way to Gujarat in 1616 and then
on the way back in 1618.7 Soon thereafter Jadrup shifted to Mathura,
where Jahangir sought him out more than once.8 There was no other
religious figure on whom Jahangir lavished so much praise. He must have
been greatly annoyed when Hakim Beg, a brother-in-law of queen Nur
Jahan, in charge of administration in Mathura (presumably as its faujdar),
had Jadrup whipped, apparently due to some grievance. When Jahangir
learnt of it, Hakim Beg was forthwith dismissed to pass the rest of his
days in retirement in Agra.9 It is not clear if Jadrup had any association
with the Gosa ins of the Chaitanya sect, or, indeed, with any temple.


                                      II

True to his reputation for saving state income after Jahangirs open-handed
years,10 Shahjahan seems to have made no additional grants to the temples
or their attendants and devotees. But he seems to have carefully honoured
all the grants previously made. At first sight, this is a little surprising in


   5 Mahmud Balkhi, Bahru’l Asrar, ed. Riazul Islam, Karachi, 1980, pp. 13-16.
  6 The short ‘historical’ account of Jewar in H.R. Nevill, Bulandshahr, a
Gazetteer, Lucknow, 1922, p. 243, offers no help in the matter.
  7 Jahangir, Tuzuk-i Jahanglri, pp. 175-76, 250-53.
  8 Ibid., 179-81.
  9 Shaikh Farid Bhakkari, Zakhlratul Khawanin ed. S. Moinul Haq, 3 vols.,
Karachi, 1961, 1970 & 1974, vol. II, p. 288.
  10 Amin Qazwini, Padshahndma, Br. Lib. Or. 173, f. 221a-b.
         The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan          95

view of a passage in Lahori’s Padshahndma, according to which Shahjahan
 ordered in his 6th ry (1633-4) that no temple whose foundations had
been laid in Jahangirs time but had not been completed, would be allowed
 to be completed; and in the Banaras area, accordingly, 76 such temples
were reportedly destroyed.11
    Yet during this very period, Shahjahan showed no intention to disturb
 any grants of the temples in Vrindavan, By a farmdn of 5 ry (November
 1632) he confirmed Jahangirs conversion of Todar Mai’s grant to the sevak
 of the Madan Mohan temple into an Imperial grant, and permitted it to
 pass in its entirety from the previous sevak, Srichand, now dead, to his
 successor, Gosaindas (Doc. No. 16). Two farmdns (not now extant but
 cited in later documents) were issued on 4 and 14 Azur 6 ry (26 November
 and 6 December 1633) to renew Akbar’s grant of 170 bighas to the temples
 of Madan Mohan, etc. The farmdn of 4 Azur confirmed grants to the
 temples of Madan Mohan (120 bighas) and Jasodhanandan (15 bighas), a
 total of 135 bighas in the villages Dosaich and Rajpur, pargana Mathura;
 the farmdn of 14 Azur confirmed 35 bighas granted to the temple Dwadas
 Adat in the village Sonrakh, nearby (farmdns cited in Docs, Nos. 19, 36,
 and 43).
     Shahjahan also took a measure to enhance the Amber family’s control
 over the management of the Govind-dev temple. This was done by his
farmdn of 1 Amurdad, 6 ry (24 July 1633). This farmdn cites Akbar’s
 grant of 1598 to the Govind-dev group of temples, but the zimn contains
 Shahjahan’s observation that ‘it is not the rule (to make grants) in the
 name of temples’. Since, as we have seen, the Madan Mohan temple
 grants were confirmed at this very time, the observation was seemingly
 made only to enable the Govind-dev grant to be transferred to the Amber
 house, which would then control the Govid-dev group of temples through
 its possession of a major source of their income. The entire grant of 135
 bighas was thus converted into an in‘dm (tax-free gift) of Raja Jai Singh of
 Amber (Doc. No. 17). Thereafter the Mughal administration recognised
 the control of the Govind-dev temple management as vested in Raja Jai
 Singh, who could appoint a person (Radha Kishandas Chakravartl) to
 supervise worship there (A'zam Khans parwana, 1643, Doc. No. 26)
 and demand the expulsion of certain persons from the temple (the same
 officer’sparwana, 1644, Doc, No. 27). Subsequently, in 1652, the followers
 of a Brahman, Har Govind, were expelled from the temple at the instance
 of Seo Ram, pujdri of the temple, armed with a recommendation from

  11 ‘Abdu’l Hamid, Lahori, Padshahndma, ed. Kabir al-Din Ahmad et al.,
Calcutta, 1866-72, vol. I, pt. I, pp. 451-2.
96                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Rao Kalyan Singh, apparently a scion of the house of Amber (Khalilullah
Khan’s parwdna 1652, Doc. No. 38).
   No such external control seemed to have been exercised over the
Madan Mohan temple, which appeared to have enjoyed some special
Imperial patronage. We have referred to Lahori’s statement that in his 6
ry, Shahjahan issued instructions to destroy certain incomplete temples.
Such a spirit is not present in his Jarman of 14 Azur ry 7 (6 December
1634), only a year later. We give a translation of this document in the
Appendix to this chapter.
   What is important in this farmdn is not only that the gharial (time­
gong) was permitted again to be sounded in the Madan Mohan temple.
The farmdn goes on to say that this was essential for ‘the worship of
God’ (‘ihddat-i ilahi); and the image-worshippers themselves are flatly
described as being engaged in ‘the worship of God’ (Khudd-parasti).
There is no reference made to the Shari‘at or Muslim Law to justify the
tolerance of an impiety, for sounding the gong is not deemed an impiety
at all. Similar phrases also occur in Afzal Khan’s parwdna (Doc. No. 22),
ordering compliance with the farmdn, but then he was merely repeating
the sentiments of Shahjahan’s own farmdn.
   Some time later, Shahjahan issued anotherfarmdn, Doc. No. 30A, dated
9 December 1644. This farmdn directed that Kishandas (Krishandas),
‘devotee of Jiv Gosa in’, should have the adhikdr (management) of the
temples of Vrindavan. It specifically recalls Akbar’s farmdn of 6 October
1568, vesting the adhikdr of the temples Madan Mohan and Govind-
dev with Jiv Gosa’in, whom Kishandas was successor to. Indeed, a letter
(Doc. No. 32) assignable to 1645 describes Kishandas as the incumbent of
the seat (dstdna) of Shri Jiv Gosa’in. In Doc. 33 of about the same time,
Kishandas is seen moving the administration to protect the pond, Radha
Kund, laid out by Jiv Gosa’in (or rather, Raghunath) in the village Arith
(now Radhakund). The nature of his control, if any, over his contemporary
Gosaindas, sevak of Madan Mohan (Docs. Nos. 17, 19, 20, 37, 42, etc.)
and Seo Ram, pujari of Govind-dev (Doc. No. 38)12 is not very clear.
   From the cases cited here from the calendared documents, it becomes
obvious that the Mughal administration saw it as its inherent right to
exercise the power of ultimate control over the management of certain
temples. Its authority was, in any case, indispensable for the protection
of any installed management against pretentious usurpers (see especially
Docs. No. 26, 27, 33 and 34, 38),

  12 In sale deeds of 9 March 1653 and 21 May 1654 (not calendared here) Seo
Ram is designated ‘adhikari’ of the Govind-dev temple.
        The Mughal Administration and the Temples ofVrindavan                 97

   In Doc. No. 39 (of29 April 1654), the administration acted in Mathura as
a mediator in a dispute between a follower of ‘Kishan Chaitan’ (Chaitanya)
and a Radhavallabhi over encroachments on ‘a seat’ (nishastgah) of Shri
Chaitanya. The matter seems to have been settled to the satisfaction of
both parties.
   Prince Dara Shukoh appears at the close of our period, when Mathura
and its vicinity were held by him in jagir. Besides the parwdnas of a routine
nature (Doc. Nos. 41, 42, and 43), there is a parwana of his official Daud
Khan, issued on 14 January 1658 (Doc. No. 44), which contains the
Prince’s order, issued upon the complaint of the pujaris of Govind-dev
temple. Responding to their petition, the Prince remitted the cattle-tax
(gdushumdn) upon the temple cows grazing in pargana Mahaban (across
the Yamuna) and prohibited local officials from subjecting gardeners of
the temple s gardens and orchards in Mahaban to hegdr or forced labour, A
similar exemption from grazing-tax (charat) was granted to the temple of
Govardan Nath in the village Gopalpur (in pargana Ao by a nishan of Dara
Shukoh), (8 Jumada II 1068 = 13 March 1658).13 A nishan of the same
Prince (27 Rajab 1068 = 30 April 1658) confirmed the grant of the village
Gokul (the famous holy place in pargana Mahaban) in favour of Girdhar
 (now deceased), son of Bithal Rai (Vitthalnath), sevak of the temple of
Gokul Nath, stated to have been originally conferred by farmans of Akbar
and Jahangir.14


                                       Ill

The documents we have calendared not only shed light on the relationship
between the Mughal administration and the Vrindavan temples and their
priests and devotees, but also on the functioning of that administration.
As Docs, Nos. 36 (of 1651) and 40 (of 1655) make clear, each grant
established by the Emperor’s farman had to be supported by parwdnas of
succeeding jdgjrddrs which were, in a sense, certificates for the genuineness
of the original farman. The jagirddr needed to see the farman and issue
the parwana because he had to relinquish the land-revenue due from the
land. His officials thus needed to ensure that the area of the grant was duly

   13 K,M. Jhaveri, Imperial Farmans (ad 1577 to ad 1805) granted to the ancestors
°f....... the Tikayat Maharaj, Bombay, 1928, Doc, No. XII, The cows belonging
to this temple were allowed to graze in two neighbouring villages (duly named)
without any imposition of kdh-chardi or any other constraint.
    14 Ibid., Doc. no. XI.
98                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

               TABLE 4.2. Jagirdars of Mathura in Shahjahan’s Reign

 Name                                          Docs. Nos.          Year
 Qasim Khan                                     15              1629
 Khan Jahan Muzaffar                             18-20          1634
 Afzal Khan                                     22              1635
 Allah Vardi Khan                               24              1638
 A‘zam Khan                                     25-7, 29        1642-4
 Islam Khan                                     30              1644
 Ja‘far Khan                                    35              1650
 Khalil/ Khalilullah Khan                       36-8            1651-52
 Sa'dullah Khan                                 40              1655
 Dara Shukoh                                    41-4            1657-58

delimited by a chakndma, or demarcation-deed, recording the boundaries
 of the area of the grant on the ground. The Sadr's tashihas (certificates)
were similarly needed to reinforce confidence in the genuineness of the
grant.
    A very large number of our calendared documents are thus parwanas
ofjagirdars or their officials. Arranged chronologically, as in our calendar,
they enable us to reconstruct a list of successive jagirdars who held the
area of Mathura and its environs during Shahjahan’s reign (see Table 4.2).
    Doc. No. 36 adds the name of Mukramat Khan just before that of
Ja‘far Khan, by a reference made to his son ‘Abdul Latif issuing a parwdna
on his behalf
    Thus we have, at least, eleven jagirdars holding the area successively in a
period of 30 years of Shahjahan’s reign, giving an average term of just 2.7
years (say, 2 years, 8 months). This is an important piece of evidence which
confirms the general statement in our authorities that jdgir assignments
used to be of very short durations.15 Our documents also shed some light
on how the jagirdars' internal administration functioned. Doc. No. 39
(of 29 April 1654) introduces to us Shaikh ‘Abdun Nabi, whose name :
is prefaced with titles suggesting that he was faujdar or commandant ‘
(Shaukat o hashmat dastgah). He was called upon to settle a dispute J

   15 Cf. Habib, Agrarian System, 1st ed., p. 260 & n; 3rd ed., pp. 301-02 & n.,
where other specific pieces of evidence obtained for average terms of jagir :
assignments in particular areas are also furnished: Sehwan (Sind), 1592-1634:2.6
years; Dhar (Malwa), 1653-85: 3.3 years; Indur (Telangana), 1631-50: 3.5 years.
         The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan                99

 between a Chaitanya-follower and a Radhavallabhi. Shaikh ‘Abdun NabI
 was in fact the faujdar of Sa‘dullah Khan, the then jagirdar of the area?6
 He was later to build the principal mosque in Mathura, and was regarded
 by Growse as the founder of modern Mathura.16   17
     In each pargana, for revenue and apparently also for police purposes,
 there was a shiqqdar appointed by the jagirdar. We find Sukhdev, shiqqddr
 of pargana Sahar, entrusted with protecting the tank Radha Kund, in the
 village Arith, against villagers’ encroachments in 1645 (Docs. Nos. 33 &
 34). In Doc. 15 (of 1629), Khwaja Ghazzal, shiqqdar of Qasim Khan, the
jagirdar, is shown as being present at the land demarcation of the grant of
 the Madan Mohan temple in village Rajpur. He was accompanied by his
 clerk (farkun), Shankardas.


Calendar

   1. Order of annual payment of Rs.60 (in Akbari khazana coins) to the
      sevaks of Madan Gopal (Madan Mohan) out of revenues ofpargana
      Jewar, in modern Bulandshahr Dist., then in the grantor’s jdglr, to
      be paid out of the farm of the village where the temple cows graze,
      Aban I ry (October-November 1606). The grantor, apparently a
      Jagirdar, cannot be identified (Madan Mohan 61). Note: Khazdna
      meant coin of the previous reign.
   2. Qdzi-certified copy ofparwdna ofRaja Man Singh, 23 Zilhijj 1016
       (9 April 1608). Orders daily payment of one ashrafi (muhr) and
       1 rupee, i.e. 9 rupees muhri, of which one ashrafi (or, in lieu of
      it, Rs.8) was to be spent on the Govind-dev temple and Re.l was
      meant for its sevak Haridas. The previous payment was Rs.5 daily
      for the temple alone. Persian text followed by Braj (NAI-2671/2).
      Note: The rate of Rs.8 given for the ashrafi seems rather low; it
      was rated at Rs.9 in the Am-i Akbari and gold appreciated in terms
      of silver subsequently.
   3. Ftibar Khan’sparwdna, 7 Rajab 1017 (18 October 1608). Protection
       to be provided to land granted by Akbar’s farmdn of 4 Shahriwar,
      43 Ilahi year, to the temples of Gobind Rai (Govind-dev), Akrur,

   16 ‘Abdal Nabby his fouzdar’ (W. Foster, ed., English Factories in India, 1655-
60, Oxford, 1921, p. 65). Not all jaglrddrs necessarily had faujdari jurisdictions
assigned to them. In such cases the faujdar was appointed by the Emperor
himself. (Cf. Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd ed., p. 339).
   17 Growse, District Memoir, pp. 150-53.
100                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

       Krishan Rai Jalori (?), and Radha Rawan in villages Dosaich (95
       bighas) and Dhaulera (40 bighas)-, total 135 bighas (NAI-2671/3).
  4.   Jahangirs farman, 1 Isfandarmuz 6 ry (19 February 1612), A tax-
       exempt grant of 10 bighas Ilahi of cultivable waste to Jadunath,
       Brahman, resident Brindaban, sevak of Thakur Dwara, the grant
       to be assigned out of the lands of village Sonrak, pargana Sahar
       (Madan Mohan 56; copy, Radhakund 141).
  5.   Jahangir’s farman (two copies) 10 Asfandarmuz ry 6 (28 February
       1612). A grant of 24 bighas of land, 14 cultivated 44 cultivable waste,
       from vill. Sonrak, pargana Sahar, to Kamdev Acharaj (Acharya)
       ‘and sons’. The zimn shows that Kamdev Acharya with sons
       received only 12 bighas by gaz-i ilahi in vill. Sonrak, while one
       Narayan Das ‘with sons’, received the remaining 12 bighas in grant
       from another village Phulgam Bandghat(?).
  6.   Chaknama (Land demarcation document), 14 Rabi‘ II 1021 (14
       June 1612). To demarcate the grant of 50 bighas Ilahi of cultivable
       waste from village Satova in pargana Matura, to Bindrabandas (30
       bighas) and Nand La‘l (20 bighas), brothers, by Jahangir’s farman of
       29 Isfandarmuz ry 6 (19 March 1612) and subsequent parwdnas of
       the Sadr, 14 Urdibihisht ry 7 (4 May 1612) and ofJumdatu’l Mulk
       Ftimaduddaula, 9 Urdibihisht ry 7 (29 April 1612) (none of these
       docs, extant). Lower part of the chaknama lost except in fragment.
       (Copy: RD 153, with photograph of back given separate No.228).
  7.   Jahangirs farman, 28 Urdibihisht 8 ry (28 April 1613). A tax-
       exempt grant of 15 bighas Ilahi in cultivable waste to Raghunath,
       Brahman, sevak of Thakur Braj Sundar temple in village Basahi
       (Basal) Buzurg, pargana Sahar (Madan Mohan 54).
  8.   Jahangirs farman, date lost but issued soon after 14 Amurdad, 8
       ry/18 Jumada II 1022 (5 August 1613), bestowing a tax-exempt
       grant of 20 bighas Ilahi, from pargana Gankar, sarkar Udambar
       (Tanda) (Bengal) to Swamidas, son of Kishandas, Brahman,
       resident Jogner, pargana Gankar (Madan Mohan 57).
  9.   Jahangirs farman, 14 Aban 8 ry (6 November 1613). The original
       grant made by Raja Todar Mai (from his own jagir) of 100 bighas
       by bamboo rod, equal to 89 bighas 9 biswas by gaz-i ilahi, in
       village Rajpur, pargana Matura, held by Gopaldas, sevak of Madan
       Mohan, now deceased, is converted into an Imperial tax-exempt
       grant and assigned to Srichand, Gopaldas’s successor as sevak of
       Madan Mohan. The same land to be held in grant as previously
       demarcated. (Radhakund 143; copies, Radhakund 166 & Madan
        The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan         101

        Mohan 177).
 10.    Sadrs parwdna 11 Di 8 ry (1 January 1614). Directs compliance
        with farmdn (No. 9). Sadrs name in seal not legible, but is
        presumably Muwarrikh Khan, named as Sadr on zimn (reverse) of
        No. 9 (Radhakund 174).
10A.    A tashlha (verification certificate), dated Urdibihisht 9 ry (21
        April-20 May 1614), presumably by a sadr, of Akbar’s grant of 135
        bighas to Govind-dev, etc. Cf. Doc.3.
 11.   Jahangirs farmdn, date lost, but issued soon after 27 Urdibihisht
        10 ry/10 Rabi’ II 1024 ah (9/18 May 1615). Tax-exempt grant
        of 15 bighas Ilahi from cultivable waste in village Basahi (Basai)
        Buzurg, pargana Sahar, to Shyam Krishan, resident of that village,
        ‘with sons’.
 12.    Order, 5 Rajab 1030 (26 May 1621) reiterating terms of order
        contained in Doc. No. 1. Issued because the sevak of Madan Gopal
        (Madan Mohan) had claimed that the original parwdna (No. 1 ?)
        had been lost. The official from whose jdgir in pargana Jewar the
        annual payment of 60 Akbarshdhi rupees was to be made is also not
        named in this document. Note: the retention of Jewar in the same
       jdgir, 1607 to 1621, suggests that the pargana was possibly held in
        watan, and so permanently, by a Rajput noble.
 13.    Official’s order, 20 Rabi’ II 1034 (30 January 1625) directing that
        the land covered by Jahangir’s farmdn (No, 9) be demarcated: the
        area already cultivated and held by the sevak of Madan Mohan
        should be left with him, and the remaining portion of the grant be
        demarcated and assigned out of waste land. Seal with officer s name
        (in part): Kalyan.
13A.    Chaknama dated 11 Safar 1037 (22 October 1627), demarcating 50
        bighas of grant to a woman KunjdasI (30 bighas in her own name)
        and another person at vill. Man, tappa Tarauli, pargana Sahar,
        of 9 Aban ry 16 (7 November 1621). The grant was apparently
        originally assigned in vill. Kunjera, the chaknama for which was
        now surrendered.
 14.    Khwaja Jahan’s instructions to Khwaja Muhammad Husain.
        Undated, but the seal indicates Jahangir as the reigning emperor.
        Directs that 10 bighas held by Rani Kaur (Kunwar), 5 bighas as
        orchard and remainder as cultivated land, be left in the hands of
        Rani Kaur’s servants (in Vrindavan). The Rani is unidentifiable but
        was probably an Amber princess or queen.
 15.    Chaknama, dated 19 Rajab 1035 (16 April 1626). Demarcation of
102                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

        12 bighas 8 biswas of land in vill. Rajpur, carried out by the jagirdar,
        Qasim Khans officials, Khwaja Ghazzal, shiqqddr, and Shankardas,
        karkun, with the knowledge of chaudhuris (three named) and
        Rajmal, qdnungo, and agreement of the muqaddams (three named)
        of the village Rajpur, pargana Matura, under terms of Jahangirs
       farmdn (No. 9). Since the grant was of 89 bighas, 9 biswas, the much
        smaller area of land now demarcated, could be the balance to be
        assigned in waste, as indicated in No. 13.
15A.    An unidentified officials parwdna requiring that the imperial grant
        conferred by Jahangir under Doc. No. 9, now held by Gosaindas,
        should continue to be honoured. Issued in name of Shahjahan (A‘ld
        Hazarat), but still dated in Jahangirs regnal era, 1 Safar 23 Ilahi
        (30 September 1628).
15B.    Similar order in respect of 35 bighas of land held in the name of
        Devala Madan Mohan in village Sonrak, pargana Sahar, date lost,
        but language similar to that of 15A and so presumably of around
        the same time.
 16.    Shahjahan’s farmdn, 4 Azur 5 RY (26 November 1632). Assigns a
        tax-exempt grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas in village Rajpur, pargana
        Mathura (cf. No. 9), to Gosaindas, in succession to Srichand, sevak
        of Madan Mohan Temple, now dead (Radhakund 173. Copies:
        Radhakund 157 (continued, 162), 171 and 175; Madan Mohan
        59).
16A.   Asaf Khans parwdna, 20 Di Shahjahan’s ry 5 (10 January 1633),
        ordering Akbar’s grant of 135 bighas to devala Madan Mohan (120
        bighas) & Jasodha Nandan (15 bighas), to be released to servants of
        the devalas concerned.
16B.   Parwdna or Tashiha from Central Sadr, Musawi Khan, dated 25
        Di ry 5 Ilahi (15 January 1633), requiring implementation of
        Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 16 above).
 17.    Shahjahan s farmdn, 1 Amurdad 6 ry (24 July 1633). Transfers a
       tax-exempt grant of 135 bighas to the temples Gobind Rai, etc.,
        originally made by Akbar’s farmdn of 4 Shahriwar 43 Ilahi (cf. No.
       3), to Raja Jai Singh as in'am on the same terms as the original
       grant because, so the Emperor observed (zimn), ‘it is not the rule
        (hukm) to (make the grants) in the name of temples’. The grant
        comprised 95 bighas in Dosaich and 40 in Dhaulera. (NAI-2671/4). ■
 18.   Parwdna of Khan Jahan Muzaffar, 8 Aban 7 ry (31 October 1634). .
        Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 17).
 19.   Parwdna of Khan Jahan Muzaffar, 8 Aban 7 ry (31 October 1634).
       Orders compliance with a farmdn of Shahjahan (no reference to
        The Mughal Administration and the Temples ofVrindavan         103

       its date) concerning a grant of 135 bighas, held by Mohan, now
       dead, which should continue to be enjoyed by those affiliated to
       the temples (Madan Mohan Coll. 44). It is obvious that Madan
       Mohan temple has been confused with Mohan as an individual,
       otherwise its contents are in conformity with Asaf Khan’s parwana
       of January 1633 (No. 16A in our list).
 20.   Parwana of Khan Jahan Muzaffar, 9 Aban 7 ry (1 November 1634).
       Orders compliance with Shahjahans Jarman (No. 16) (Radhakund
       176).
20A.   Parwana of Khan Jahan Muzaffar, 16 Aban 7 ry (8 November
       1634), requiring maintenance of Akbar’s grant of 142 bighas 5
       biswas to sevaks of devala Gopinath in village Dosaich (IVS 175 A
       and B).
 21.   Shahjahans ^rmdn. 14 Azur 7 ry (6 December 1634). Orders that
       the time-gong (gharial) be allowed to be sounded in the temple
       of Madan Mohan, Bindraban, in order to assist ‘worship of God’
       (Madan Mohan Coll). Translation in Appendix to this chapter.
 22.   Afzal Khans parwana 25 Di, 7 ry (15 January 1635). Orders
       compliance with Shahjahans farman (No. 21). (Madan Mohan
       Coll.).
 23.   Parwana, Urdibihisht 9 ry (April-May 1636), ordering compliance
       with Akbar’s farman of 14 Shahriwar 43 ry, assigning 135 bighas
       of land in villages Dosaich and Dhaulera for the benefit of rhe
       temples of Gobind Rai, etc. (cf. Doc. No. 3). There is no seal,
       and the official issuing the parwana cannot be identified. Note: in
       light of Nos. 17 and 18 the authenticity of this document becomes
       doubtful, since the grant in question had already been transferred
       to Jai Singh.
23A.   Parwana of Saif Khan [then Governor, suba of Agra (Akbarabad)]
       dated 27 Azur, ry 10(?) (24 December 1637?), ordering protection
       of Akbar’s grant of 142 bighas to sevaks of devala Gopinath (IVS
       184).
 24.   Allah Vardi Khan s parwana, 19 Isfandarmuz/ 22 Shawwal 1047 (9
       March 1638). Orders compliance with Shahjahans farman (no. 17)
       (NAI-2671/7).
24A.   Parwana from unidentified official requiring officials of pargana
       Mathura to protect 140 bighas of grant of Gopinath [temple] etc.,
       held in madad-i ma ash. Dated 17 Rabi1 1050 (7 July 1640). (IVS
       160 A and B).
 25.   A‘zam Khan’s parwana, Shahan 1052 (October-November 1642).
       Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s farman (No. 16).
104                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  26. A‘zam Khan’s parwdna, Jumada I 1053 (27 July 1643). Notes that
       the temple of Gobind Dev Jiu was built in Bindraban by Raja Man
       Singh, and that Raja Jai Singh had appointed Radha Kishandas
       Chakravarti to supervise worship at the temple. Kashi Ram, who
       is obstructing the latter, must be prevented from doing so (NAI-
       2671/8). Seal ofParkhotam Das recording receipt, 10 Jumada I (28
       July 1643).
  27. Azam Khansparwdna 15 Ziqad 1053 (25 January 1644). Raja Jai
       Singhs agent (vakil) has reported that the temple Gobind Dev in
       Bindraban is under his principal’s charge; yet Murli, Chintaman,
       etc., Bangalis, are entering the temple without his permission.
       They are to be expelled; Laichand and other Bangalis are also to
       be prohibited from going to the temple (NAI-2671/9).
  28. Parwdna of Sayyid Jalal, Sadrus Sudur, 14 Muharram 17 ry,
       ah 1054 (23 March 1644). Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s
      farmdn (No. 17). (NAI-2691/3).
  29. A‘zam Khan’s parwdna, 26 Muharram 1054 (4 April 1644). Orders
       compliance with Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 17) and Sadrus Sudurs
      parwdna (No. 28).
  30. Islam Khan’s parwdna, 14 Ramazan 18 ry (14 November 1644).
       Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 30A) that
       Kishandas, devotee of Jiv Gosa’in, should have the management
       (adhikar) of the temples (devalaha) of Madan Mohan and Govind-
       dev, Bindraban.
30A. Farmdn [of Shahjahan], dated 9 Shawwal 1054/9 December 1644.
       By & farmdn of Akbar the management (adhikar) of Madan Mohan
       and Gobind-dev temples had been entrusted to Jiv Gosa’in, who in
      his lifetime passed it on to his disciple Kishan Das. The Emperor,
      being informed of his integrity, honesty and poverty, has ordered
      that the right of management aforesaid should solely remain with
      him. All officers concerned are required to implement this order.
      (Copy: RD 133). Curiously, No. 30, which was issued to comply
      with this farmdn, carries an earlier date.
  31. Parwdna, 12 Rajab 19 ry (3 September 1645). Orders compliance
      with Nos. 17 and 28. The seal is not legible, so that the officer
      issuing the parwdna cannot be identified. (NAI-2671/10).
31 A. The parwdna of a high officer (name not clear from seal impression)
      directing officers of pargana of Matura to act in compliance with
      Shahjahan’s farmdn, No. 16 in our list. Dated 6 Shwwal ry 19 (25
      November 1645).
  32. Letter to Mehta Sitaldas, soliciting his assistance against a Brahman
       The Mughal Administration and the Temples ofVrindavan           105

      who was interfering with the holdings of the late Jiv Gosa’in,
      nephew of Sanatan Gosa in. At the present time Krishandas is
      the incumbent of the seat (astand) of Jiv Gosa in. He should be
      assisted in anything he requires to be done with regard to the
      matter. Sitaldas should introduce him to his master, and suitably
      advise the latter (presumably the jagirddr of the area). The writer
      of the letter does not name himself but describes himself as ‘the
      humblest servant and disciple of that devotee of God (Bhagwan
      Bhakt) Jiv Gosain’. Begins with the invocation Alldhu Akbary with
      salutation ‘Ram, Ram’ in text. Wants his own letter to be returned
      to the bearer Krishandas after perusal. No date, but apparently
      preceding No. 33, and in any case not later than 1658 (Radhakund
      86).
33.   An official’s letter to Sukhdev, shiqqdar ofpargana Sahar: Kishandas,
      Brahman, resident of Bindraban, claims the land of the Kund
      (tank) in the village Arith (Radhakund) to be his. The muqaddams
      of the village were cutting down trees and had interfered with the
      water channel (rdh-i ghat) to the Kund. Any oppressive acts (like
      these) were to be prevented. Officials seal bears the name ‘Sayyid
      Lutf-[ullah]and the year 1055 (ad 1645-6) (Radhakund 104).
34.   Statement dated 21 Ramazan 1055 (10 November 1645) of
      muqaddams of village Arith before the official, Sukhdev, pledging
      themselves not to cut down trees above the Kund and not to bring
      under the plough the channel (ndla) carrying water to the Kund.
      (Copy: Radhakund 102).
35.   Jafar Khans parwana, 5 Safar 23 ry (7 February 1650). Orders
      compliance with No. 17. (NAI-2901/4).
36.   Khalil Khan’s parwana, 27 Jumada I 24 ry (18 May 1651), Orders
      compliance with Shahjahan’s Jarman (not extant but referred to in
      No. 19), confirming a grant of 135 bighas to ‘those connected with
      the temples of Madan Mohan, etc.’. On its zimn, it gives the date of
      Shahjahans farman as 4 Azur 6 ry (25 November 1633), and cites
      the parwdnas of the Sadr Musawi Khan, A‘zam Khan, Allah Vardi
      Khan, ‘Abdu’l Latif, son of Mukramat Khan, and Bhagwandas
      (agent of Ja’far Khan), none of which are extant. (Madan Mohan
      62).
37.   Khalil Khan’sparwana, 27 Jumada II1061 (17 June 1651), ordering
      compliance with No. 16. Gosaindas is said to be alive. Copy: Madan
      Mohan 104.
38.   Khalilullah Khan’s parwana to ‘Inayat Khan, 11 Sha‘ban 26 ry
      (18 July 1652). Rao Kalyan Singh has written to say that Gosa’in
106                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

       Seo Ram, pujarl of Gobind Temple, is to be assisted. Seo Ram
       complained of a Brahman, Har Gobind, who had committed theft
       in the temple and then committed suicide by taking poison. His
       men are to be expelled from the temple. (Govind-dev Coll.).
 39.   Statement of settlement of dispute under the Qazi’s seal, 11 Jumada
       II 1064 (29 April 1654). Gauranga Bangall (in Mathura) lodged
       a complaint with the faujdar (this position indicated by titles)
       Shaikh ‘Abdun Nabl that Damodardas Radhaballabh! had seized
       trees belonging to the seat of ‘Kishan Chaitan (Chaitanya), who
       was our Guru’. Two mediators being appointed, a division of trees
       was made between the two parties. Settlement agreed to by both.
       Witnesses’ signatures.
 40.   Sa‘dullah Khans parwdna, 1 Rabi* II 27 ry (8 February 1655).
       Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s order (No. 17). Zimn says
       that the agent (wakll) of Mirza Raja Jai Singh had indicated that
       he did not then have with him the original farmdn, the sanads
       of the previous jaglrdars, the tashihanama (the sadrs certificate),
       and the chakndma (land-demarcation deed). Nevertheless, at his
       solicitation, the present parwdna was issued. (NAI-2691/5).
 41.   Parwdna of Prince Dara Shukoh’s officials, Daud Khan, Sayyid
       Fazlullah and Gobind-das, T1 Zilhijj 30 ry (16 October 1657).
       Orders compliance with Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 17) and a nishan
       of Prince Dara Shukoh, dated 23 Zlqad 1066 (12 September 1656)
       (not extant), regarding the in'dm of 130 bighas granted to Mirza
       Raja Jai Singh (NAI-2671/11).
 42.   Parwdna of the same officials, 9 Muharram 30 ry (28 October
       1657) ordering compliance with Shahjahan’s farmdn (No. 16).
       Gosa’indas, the beneficiary, was thus alive. (Radhakund 170).
 43.   Parwdna of the same officials, Muharram 30 ry (October-November
       1657) ordering compliance with farmdn of Shahjahan (not extant)
       (of 14 Azur 6 ry or 6 December 1633), by which 35 bighas of land
       (out of a total grant of 170 bighas for temples of Madan Mohan,
       etc.) had been assigned [by Akbar’s farmdn of 1598] ‘in madad-i
       ma ash to those connected with the temple of Dwadas Adat,’ the
       land being situated in village Sonrakh, pargana Sahar. Zimn refers
       to a separate parwdna (not extant) being issued in respect of the
       remaining 135 bighas of the grant (Madan Mohan 42).
 44.   Parwdna of Dara Shukoh’s official, Daud Khan, 9 Rabi4 II 31 RY
       (14 January 1658) to officials of pargana Mahaban. The pujdrls of ;
       Gobind-dev Temple had represented to Prince Dara Shukoh that
         The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan                 107

       under previous jagirdars they were exempted from the cattle-tax
       (gau-shumdri), but in the preceding year the Princes officials in
       Mahaban had exacted the tax as well as subjected the gardeners
       of the gardens/orchards of the said temples (plural used) to begdr
       (forced labour). Since the complainants ‘deserve concession’, the
       gau-shumari is remitted and the gardeners are not to be subjected
       to begdr (Govind-dev Collection).
  45,Parwdna of official (not identifiable from seal), date lost, but from
       invocation ‘Allahu Akbar’, assignable to reigns of Jahangir and
       Shahjahan. Since the tank (Radhakund) near village Arith had
       been dug by a person to attain spiritual merit, no one is permitted
       to raise singharas (water-chestnuts) in that tank (Radhakund 119).


Note

Shaikh Farid Bhakkarl, writing in 1651, refers to two officers posted asfaujddrs
at Mathura (though in one case he makes the slip of using the term silbaddr),
viz. Murshid Quit Khan Turkman and Murawwat Khan Turkman, crediting both
of them with possession of large harems and attributing to the former a
discreditable escapade involving the abduction of a Hindu woman at a fair
(Zakhiratu’l Khawanin, ed. S. Moinul Haq, Vol. II, Karachi, 1970, pp. 372, 398).
It turns out, vide M. Athar Ali, The Apparatus ofEmpire', Awards ofRanks, Offices
and Titles to the Mughal Nobility, Delhi, 1985, entries nos. S 280 et seq., that the
two persons were really one, Murawwat Khan Turkman having received in due
course the title of Murshid Quit Khan. He was appointed faujdar of Mathura and
Mahaban in 1635-36 (ibid., S. 1141), which office he held until his death in
1637-38 (ibid., S. 1322, S. 1450 and S. 1936). At his death he held the fairly high
mansab (rank) of 2,500 zat/2,50Q sawdr.
108                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times


                               Appendix

Translation of Shah Jahans Farmdn (No .21 in the Calendar)
Invocation:
‘God is Great’
Tughra                                              Square Imperial Seal
                                                    of Shahjahan
It has been represented to His Sacred Majesty that in the temple (devala)
of Madan Mohan, situated in village Bindraban, in the jurisdiction of
pargana Mathura, stiba Akbarabad (Agra), a large body of God-worshipping
Hindu mendicants are engaged in the worship of God, according to their
own religion and custom. For practising the rites of Gods worship in the
said temple, a time-gong (gharial) was in use for the purpose of intimating
the passage of hours and the time of night and day. For some time, as a
result of the interference and prohibition by officials, this (the sounding
of the gong) has been in suspension. As a result, the proper timings of
the acts of devotion and worship of God cannot be maintained owing to
the passage of hours of night and day not being sounded. (The devotees)
are hopeful that the (sounding of the) time-gong will be permitted within
the said temple in accordance with past practice. Therefore the world­
subduing, sun-illuminating, sky-reaching Order has been issued to the
effect that no one should obstruct the sounding of the time-gong in the
said temple. Officials, present and future, should strive for the continuance
and fulfilment of this order, ensure that the time-gong is in use in the
said temple, and not obstruct it for any reason. They are not to practise
delay in carrying out what has been ordered. Written, dated 14 Azur
month Ilahi Regnal Year 7 (29 November 1634),
                           CHAPTER 5



             Dealing with Multiplicity
     Mughal Administration in Braj Bhum
        Under Aurangzeb, 1659-1707

                              Irfan Habib




The state everywhere must deal with a certain degree of variation in
terms of class, religion, and custom among the population over whom its
authority is exercised. In Mughal India, owing to the caste system and the
two major religions, Hinduism and Islam, the element of multiplicity was
exceptionally complex. There was the further possible complication that
the local administration’s conduct was not necessarily always in consonance
with the declared policies of the central government, however despotic the
sovereign in theory might have been.
    A study is offered here of the ways in which the Mughal administration
in Braj Bhum, with Mathura as its centre,1 dealt with Hindus, and
occasionally Muslims, in matters of worldly concern, as well as religious
life, during the reign of Aurangzeb (1659-1707). One is able to present
such a study with some confidence because of the large amount of material
in the shape of contemporary documents in Persian, and, in smaller
part, in Braj, that has been preserved by the Gosa’ins (Goswamis) of
Vrindavan, and then brought together in the form of photographs and
xerox copies by the late Dr Tarapada Mukherjee (see Introduction to this
 volume). Unfortunately, most of the photocopies were unnumbered and
 many did not even indicate to which collection or source they should
 be credited. When I had transcribed them, I arranged the transcribed
 material chronologically (by years) and then numbered the sheets. I have
 found it easier to cite each document in this chapter by the number of the
 sheet of the transcript which contains it or on which it begins, in case

   1 For the boundaries of Braj Bhum in Mughal times, see Map 1.
110                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

the transcription extends to more than one sheet. The photographs and
xerox copies that I possess also have had these numbers put on them at
the back. In addition, there are documents from other sources, notably
the National Archives of India, which duly bear their own numbers. In
such cases I give both the official number the document bears and the
transcript sheet number. All these documents have been made available
to public access through being scanned at the library of the Department
of History, Aligarh University. All Hijri dates have been converted into
equivalent dates of the Christian era (Gregorian system) in this chapter,
and only the latter are specified here.
   1 have chosen three out of the several aspects of the activities of the
Mughal administration that can be studied on the basis of the material we
possess: first, the treatment of temples and of their priests especially with
regard to their grants, properties and income; second, the operation of the
machinery of justice and law-and-order: and, third, the application of the
law of escheat to the Gosains’ property, illustrated by one long drawn-out
case. It will be seen that in order to introduce some relevant evidence I
have sometimes gone beyond the limits of Aurangzeb’s reign.


State Grants to Temples and Priests

The temples and priests of Vrindavan and Mathura depended on the
support they received from their princely and rich, as well as poor, devotees.
The temples at Vrindavan, especially Govind-dev, had, in addition, the
consistent patronage of the Amber house, whose rulers throughout the
great days of the Mughal Empire remained in high favour at the Imperial
Court. But the aid of the Imperial Court itself, in financial terms, was not
inconsiderable. Imperial grants of land to temple-priests began as early
as 1565 (200 bighas granted to Gopaldas of Madan Mohan temple, No.
17), and all grants to temples of the vicinity were revised and raised to
1000 bighas ilahi, by Akbar’s farmdn of 1598 (NAI-267 (l)=No. 57; copies,
Nos. 66 and 78), the grant area being equal to about 240 hectares or 600
acres.23To this total Jahangir is known to have added at least 253.45 bighas
ilahi amounting to nearly 60 hectares or over 152 acres? Shahjahan, while

   2 The grants under Akbar have been discussed by Tarapada Mukherjee and
Irfan Habib, ‘Akbar and the Temples of Mathura and its Environs’, PIHC, 48th
session (1988, Goa), pp. 214-50 (Chapter 3 in this volume).
    3 Data derived from Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, ‘The Mughal
Administration and the Temples ofVrindaban during the Reigns ofJahangir and
                           Dealing with Multiplicity                          111

benevolent in confirming older grants, does not seem to have issued any
new grant of his own to any temple or priest ofVrindavan.
    When the reign of Aurangzeb (1659-1707) began, there was apparently
little indication that a change in the official attitude would occur. In
May 1659, the faujdar of Mathura, Jafar Saljuqi, administering pargana
Mahaban, exempted from cattle-tax (gdu-shumari) all the cattle belonging
to the Govind-dev, Gopinath, and Madan Mohan temples (ofVrindavan)
that were brought to graze in that pargana in the vicinity of Mansarowar,
situated on the eastern side of the Yamuna, opposite Vrindavan (No. 216).
In September 1659, the same official gave special permission for cattle of
the Madan Mohan temple to graze freely in four named villages, including
Begampur and Mansarowar (No. 217).
    The first indication of change seems to have come in 1666 when
Aurangzeb ordered the destruction of the stone-railings (katehra) of the
Keshav Rai temple of Mathura.4 But what caused the most alarm was
when Aurangzeb, all of a sudden, early in 1670, without any provocation
or apparent cause, ordered the demolition of the Keshav Rai temple itself.
This temple had been built by Jahangir’s trusted noble, Bir Singh Bundela,
the ruler of Orchha and the murderer of Abu’l Fazl, at a reputed cost of
Rs.33 lakh (a more moderate contemporary estimate: Rs.10 lakh). A large
number of labourers were put to the task of dismantling the temple so
as to achieve its destruction as quickly as possible. Its idols were taken
to Agra to be laid on the ground for being stepped on by worshippers at
the mosque of Princess Jahanara. Further, Mathura was given the official
name of Islamabad.5

Shahjahan’, PHIC, 49th session (Dharwad, 1989), pp. 287-300 (Chapter 4 in
this volume). The grant of 20 bighas to Swamidas is excluded from our figure.
    4 An eye-witness account of this was provided in the report of the vakil of
Mirza Raja Jai Singh in the Akbbdrdt-i-Darbar-i-Mu‘alld, printed in G. H.
Khare, Persian Sources of Indian History, VI, Poona, 1973, p. 20. The faujdar
‘Abu’n Nabi Khan had the old wooden railing reinstated by the temple attendants,
in place of the stone one. On this officer, see footnote 20.
      For these details, see Saqi Musta‘idd Khan, Ma’dsir-i ‘Alamgiri, Bib. Ind.,
Calcutta, 1870-3, pp. 95-6. His estimate of Rs.33 lakh spent on its construction
is surely excessive: Around 1650 Shaikh Farid Bhakkari gave an estimate of Rs. 10
lakh, while saying that Bir Singh Bundela had built the temple in such a manner
that ‘it would last till the Day of Judgement’ (S. Moinul Haq, ed., Zakhlratu-l
Khawdnin, Karachi, 1971, vol. II, p. 364)—a prophesy tragically falsified so soon.
See also F.S. Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir, 3rd ed. 1882, reprint, New
Delhi, 1979, pp. 126-29, where descriptions of the temple by two contemporary
French observers, Bernier and Tavernier, are also quoted.
112                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   That this incident caused great consternation among priests of other
temples is shown by the action of Seo Ram (Shiv Ram), the custodian
of the Govind-dev temple at Vrindavan. As his vakil (representative)
acknowledged before the Qazi of Mathura in 1675, ‘when the dehra
(temple) of Keshav Rai was destroyed, he (Seo Ram) removed himself to
Kaman Pahari’ (No. 233). He did not, however, go alone—he took the
idols at the Govind-dev temple with him, and later received instructions
from Raja Ram Singh of Amber to remove the idols further to Bhatesar
(No. 233, dated 19 October 1671), a stage in their journey to Amber as
their ultimate destination. Thus even a high noble of Aurangzeb now
felt nervous about the idols’ safety.6 That the alarm was not altogether
without cause is shown by the fact that as late as June 1681, Hasan
‘All Khan, Governor of suba Agra, reported to the Court that he had
destroyed a temple at Mathura and laid out a village adjacent to it, naming
it Hasanpur, after himself.7
   It seems, however, that no major temple in Vrindavan was, in fact,
affected.8 Seo Ram, who had gone to Kaman with the idols, had come back


   6 For the removal of the Govind-dev idol from Vrindavan, see also R. Nath,
‘Sri Govindadev’s Itinerary from Vrindavana to Jayapura, c. 1534-1727,’ in
Margaret H. Case, ed., Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, New Delhi, 1996, pp.
161-184, esp. pp. 166-69. (Place names and personal names are often converted
into imaginary Sanskrit forms in this volume).
   It was not only the idols of the Govind-dev temple that were removed from
Vrindavan. In a statement of 1739, and in a further undated one, Gosa’in Ram
Jiwan, priest of the Gopinath temple, referred to the removal (‘departure’) to
Kaman of the thakur of the Gopinath temple as well, over sixty years earlier,
whereafter for some time much neglect occurred in the repair and protection of
the temples property in Vrindavan (Nos. 401 and 405).
   7 Akhbdrdt, extracted in G. H. Khare, op. cit., p. 118.
   3 The sole reference to temple demolition in Vrindavan that I have been able
to trace is in a sale-deed of ad 1691, where, while giving particulars of a plot of
land sold near Chirghat, it is said to be bordered on the west by the wall of
Gobindi Bagh, a garden attached to a ‘demolished temple’ (butkb.dna-i munhadima)
(No. 245). There is no other hint of any harm caused to any temple in the large
number of documents from Vrindavan that have come down to us from the
period, nor in the enthusiastic account of the temple-town left by the historian
Bhimsen, who visited it in Aurangzeb s 41st regnal year (1697-8) (Nuskha-i
Dilkushd, Br. Lib. MS, Or. 23, £ 127a).
   This, therefore, raises the question as to when the sanctuaries (garbhagrtha)
of the Govind-dev and Radha Vallabh temples were destroyed, apparently
constituting the sole physical evidence of (partial) temple destruction at
                         Dealing with Multiplicity                         113

to Mathura-Vrindavan by 1675 (No. 234), and, as our documents suggest,
continued to stay there till his death in or before 1692? A more telling
indication of normality was the continued maintenance of the land-grants
previously issued to the temples or their custodians. Thus the grant of
135 bighas for the maintenance of the Govind-dev temple, assigned to the
Amber house, was repeatedly confirmed. Such confirmation was provided
in 1661, and then in 1671, 1695, and 1707 (Nos. 220, 231, 258, and 293).
Similarly, the grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas, in favour of the custodians
of Madan Mohan temple was confirmed in 1691, 1697, and 1707/1711
(Nos. 244, 266, and 290). The fact that a grant of 76 bighas, 2 biswas, in
Ilahi measure (originally, 100 bighas), conferred on Madho, priest of the
Gopinath temple, by Akbar in 1568-69 continued with his successors until
 1722, when it was again confirmed (No. 22), shows that this grant too
had been maintained under Aurangzeb. That the local administration had
little interest in dispossessing the Gosains of their grants is further shown
by the fact that when in April 1692 Gosaindas, custodian of the Madan
 Mohan temple, claimed that the chakndma (demarcation document) of
 the imperial grant of 89 bighas, 9 biwas, in village Rajpur, that he held,
 had been lost in the Jat uprising (fiitur-i Jat), Muhammad Hashim, the
 revenue-assessor (amln) of the pargana, raised no objection to a fresh
 demarcation and, after a fresh survey, issued a new chakndma which has
 survived (No. 247).
    Not only did the local Mughal administration thus refrain from casting
 covetous eyes on the land-grants of the Gosa ins, despite Aurangzebs
 general order of 1672-73 requiring resumption of all grants held by


Vrindavan. Shrivatsa Goswami (in Case, ed., Dialogue in Stone, pp. 271-72)
suggests this might have happened in the case of the Govind-dev temple at
Aurangzebs direction, c.1670. This is doubted by George Michell (in ibid., pp.
120-2), on the ground of the garbhagrihas alone being chosen for destruction and
for the further reason that worship in the Govind-dev temple continued at least
until the 1730s, which would not have been possible had the sanctuary been
demolished. Indeed, given the profusion of Persian and Braj documentation from
the reigns of Aurangzeb and his successors relating to Vrindavan, it would be
strange if such an act were not hinted at anywhere. It would also not have been
possible for the imperial land grants to the Govind-dev temple to be maintained
had the temple been officially marked for destruction. How and when the
sanctuaries of the two temples were demolished thus remains a puzzle.
    9 See Irfan Habib, ‘A Documentary History of the Gosains of the Chaitanya
Sect at Vrindavan’, in Margaret Case, ed., op. cit., s. v. Shiv Ram/Seo Ram,
pp. 156-57 (Chapter 10 in this volume).
 114                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Hindus,1011 or, as we have noted in Chapter 1, imposing on them thejizya
or poll tax in 1679, but they also found a way to add to the Gosa ins’
income. On 7 February 1704 Mukhtar Khan, Governor of siiba Agra,
issued the following order (No. 278) to ‘officials, present and future,
agents ofjagirdars, the chudhuris and qanungos,u ta* alluqdars, zamindars,
and muqaddams (village headmen) of pargana Islamabad, i.e. Mathura,
etc., situated within the siiba of Akbarabad (Agra)’:

At this time, it has been brought to notice that Rup and Haridas, the preceptors
of the preceptors (pirdn-pir) of Swami Brajanand,12 having abandoned the world,
settled in village Bindraban [Vrindavan] when it was all jungle, without human
 habitation. At that time they made their home here, establishing the institution
of headship and custom for their own sect of mendicants, so that they, after
retiring to a corner, should not seek (worldly) pleasure, but busy themselves in
worship of Divinity and in wandering within Braj Bhum. They do not (thus)
reside outside Braj Bhum, and they entertain mendicants, both Hindu and
Muslim, who arrive hungry. The zamindars of the parganas of Braj Bhum have,
in addition to the assessed revenue (jama"), been paying one rupee on account of
the kharj-i sadir-warid (‘expenditure on those arriving and departing’) for the
mendicants (bairags), each village paying half [a rupee] in the kharif season, and
half in the rabi season. Now, it has been agreed with the zamindars that,
recognising the said Brajanand as successor to the sons of the said Rup and
Haridas, the said amount be converted into an amount of charity, as alms on
behalf of His August Majesty, for the benefit of the mendicants and the indigent,
without any loss to the government being involved, as per reverse (zimn).
Henceforth with effect from the beginning of tahsll (revenue-collection), season
to season and year to year, they should pay the amount to [Brajanand] aforesaid,
so that spending it on their subsistence, they [the mendicants] may engage
themselves in worship of the Creator and praying for the long life of His Majesty.

   The reverse (zimn) reads as follows:

The amount payable to Swami Brajanand, from amongst sons [successors] of Rup
[and] Haridas: One rupee per year, per village in parganas, including Islamabad,
i.e. Mathura, etc., within siiba Akbarabad [Agra], not affecting the jama‘, being
entirely [itemised as] kharj-i sadir-warid with agreement of jagirdars and
zamindars.


   10 Cf. Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System ofMughal India, 1556-1707, 3rd ed.,
New Delhi, 2014, pp. 365-67 & n.
   11 On these two officials (chaudhuri and qdnungo), see ibid, pp. 331-38.
   12 See Habib, ‘A Documentary History, etc.,’ op. cit., s.v. Brajanand, pp. 135-
36 (Chapter 10 in this volume).
                           Dealing with Multiplicity                          115

18 Mahals
[1] Parganas of Mathura etc., this [western or right] side of Yamuna:
13 Mahals'. Parganas of Haveli Mathura, Sahar, Mangotla, Ol, Au, Pahadl,
Kaman, Khoh, Noh, KhohrT, Hodal, Palwal, Faridabad.
[2] Parganas of Mahaban, etc., the other [eastern or left] side of Yamuna.
5 Mahals: Mahaban, including tappa Mat, Sadabad, Jalesar, Koi [Aligarh],
Anupnagar [Anupshahr],

   The conversion of a prohibited cess such as kharj-i sadir-a-warid,
usually exacted by visiting officials,13 into an annual levy of one rupee from
each village, over and above the states land-revenue, was an ingenious
way of augmenting the income of Swami Brajanand and his followers,
for though the rate was low, the area from which it was collected was
large, comprising as many as eighteen parganas. Seeing as the suba of Agra
c.1690 contained 233 parganas and 30,180 villages in Aurangzebs reign,
yielding an average of 129.5 villages per pargana, it is fair to assume that
the 18 parganas of Braj Bhum contained about 2,332 villages. In that case,
if most villages met their obligations, the total annual receipts should
have exceeded Rs.2000, a tidy sum for those days.14 Brajanand himself was
the representative (vakil) of Gobind Charan, custodian of the Govind-
dev temple, and so belonged to the line of Rup Gosain. (See entry on
Brajanand in Chapter 10).
   What could be gained under Aurangzeb naturally continued under
his successors, who did not necessarily share his prejudiced outlook.
Jagannath received his entitlement to the custodianship of the Govind-


    13 Cf. Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd ed., p. 288.
    14 The number of parganas in suba Agra has been counted from the revenue
statistics for suba in Brit. Lib. MS Add, 6586, ff. 92b-89b (folios numbered in
reverse) datable to c.1690. The number of villages, province-wise, for Aurangzebs
reign are tabulated in Habib, Agrarian System, 3rd ed., p.4, where sources are also
indicated.
   What motivated Mukhtar Khan in providing this windfall for the Gosa’ins of
Vrindavan is not clear. Apparently, where his own interests were concerned, he
could care little for Vrindavan. An agent of the Amber Court reported that, while
laying out a garden in Mathura, Mukhtar Khan was allowing his men to ransack
buildings in Vrindavan for stones and other building materials (‘Jaipur Documents’,
transcript No. 85, p. 329, in the Library of the Department of History, Aligarh).
On 2 February 1706 Jai Singh issued a parwana (CU) addressed to his agent, La‘1
Chand, about a complaint that Mukhtar Khan’s men had removed 38 cart-loads
and 8 boat-loads of stone, etc., from a haveli and kunj belonging to the Amber
court at Vrindavan, again for the ‘garden-house’ he was building at Mathura.
116                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 dev temple from Gobind Charan in 1710, and some time afterwards the
 zamlndars, etc., (all those categories addressed in No. 278) submitted
 an acknowledgment to Brajanand, but in the capacity of a ‘brother’ of
Jagannath, ‘head of all Gosa ins of Bindraban’, that, in lieu of kharj-i
 sadir-warid, they would from all villages of the eighteen parganas, now
 listed afresh, pay annually one rupee per year to him (No. 300).11
     But if here Brajanand was now treated as mere agent of Jagannath, he
 still remained a prominent figure. On 28 December 1718, Mahyar Khan,
faujdar of Mathura,15 16 issued a parwdna, reciting that ‘Gusains, Bairagis,
 and Mahants had from old times been living in village Bindraban’, and
 people coming from different provinces left large amounts in charity for
 them, which were secretly divided up among some persons, while little
 could reach others. To rectify this evil, certain ‘leaders and mahants —
 Brajanand, Mohan Das, etc., from the Gaudiyas (Chaitanya sect); Kishor
 Das, Hari, etc., from the Radha Ballabhis; Ayaldas, Banksidhar, etc., from
 the Haridasis; and Sat Ram, Ram Das, etc., from the Ramanandis—
 were now chosen to distribute the amounts received in charity among
 mendicants of their respective sects in a proper manner (No. 345). This
 intention to be fair to all the four major Vaishnavite sects at Vrindavan
 does credit to Mahyar Khan, though whether charity could ever have been
 fairly apportioned among the deserving by any set of authorised persons
 may well be doubted.




   15 The practice of levying a rupee on each village to maintain individuals or
groups from among religious men, which, when instituted in Braj Bhum in 1704,
had apparently no precedent, seems to have been revived in the late days of the
Empire. But for this a different precedent was cited in 1736. The wazlr
Qamaniddin Khan issued uparwana (No. 397) recognising that in pargana Batala
(suba Lahore) the levy of Re.l as.4 per village per annum had been sanctioned in
favour of the followers of Ghulam Qadiri, etc., and so approved a similar levy of
one rupee per village in pargana Sahar to benefit Baidnath Brahman and his
group of mendicants. Growse (District Memoir, p. 39n.) tells us that he saw ‘a
sanad of 1739 issued by Vizir Karmuddin (sic) Khan’, which assigned a rupee per
day to a pujari Rup Chand from ‘the revenues of Mahaban tahsil (sic)’. Perhaps,
this was the same kind of arrangement as the one made in Sahar, which Growse
misconstrued as a daily allowance.
   16 He was appointed to this post in October 1713 (Muhammad Hadi Kamwar
Khan, Tazkiratus Salatln-i Chaghatd, ed. Muzaffar Alam, Bombay, 1980, p. 186),
He apparently continued in the post until his appointment as faujdar of Gwalior
in September 1718 (ibid., p. 341).
                           Dealing with Multiplicity                         117

Justice and Law Enforcement

In local Mughal administration, the sphere of justice seems to have been
broadly divided between the adjudication of civil or property matters,
which lay within the jurisdiction of the qdzi, each pargana usually having
one, on the one hand, and the handling of criminal cases or violent
disputes, which were generally dealt with by the faujdar (commandant) or
his agent, or, in a large town, the kotwdl, on the other.17
   The qdzi, who held his appointment from the imperial court,
represented a class, one which had its sharp critics among contemporaries,
ranging from high officials to foreign observers.18 It would be hardly
reasonable to expect that the documents which the qdzts themselves have
left behind would display the malpractices attributed to them; rather, we
may assume that their actions, as recorded formally on paper, would be
what was officially expected of them in respect of propriety and rectitude.
   It is obvious from our documents that for persons of property or those
entering into property transactions, the qazi’s role was crucial, for he
was the certifying officer for all sale-deeds, transfer and gift documents,
and contractual agreements, by which rights and entitlements could be
protected in the future. He was expected to certify, with his endorsement
and seal, copies of all original documents. When the original document
was drawn up, the qdzi was expected to put his endorsement and seal
after examining the parties, guarantors (if any), and witnesses, their names
being recorded with their marks, signatures, or seals. And, after about
1650, the physical descriptions (huliya) of the persons concerned also
began to be furnished in the margin of each document.
   From our present point of view there are other matters of interest too
in the documents which the qdzis certified by their seals. We should bear
in mind that there were some Muslim Gaurua peasants who often acted in


   17 There were, however, occasions, as in the case of zamindari disputes and
other land-right matters, when the jurisdictions would overlap. See Habib,
Agrarian System, 3rd ed., p. 219 and n.
   13 E.g., the irrepressible ‘Abdu’l Qadlr Badauni, Muntakhabut Tawarikh, ed.
Ali, Ahmad and Lees, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1964-9, vol. Ill, pp. 137-38; the sedate
Abu’l Fazl, Akbamama, ed. Agha Ahmad Ali and Abdur Rahim, Bib. Ind., 1873-
87, vol. Ill, p, 372; Shah Nawaz Khan, Ma’dsiru’l Umard, ed. Abdur Rahim and
Ashraf Ali, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1888-91, vol. II, p. 239; Francisco Pelsaert,
Jahangir’s India, tr. W. H. Moreland and P. Geyl, Cambridge, 1925, pp. 57-58;
and Francois Bernier, Travels in the Mogul Empire, 1656-68, tr. A. Constable,
revd. V. A. Smith, London, 1916, p. 257.
118                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

unison with their Hindu fellow-villagers in selling land—as, for example,
Nizam, Hamyan (Humayun), and Naso (Nasir) appearing as sellers along
with Gahan, Hardas, Sital, and others in a sale-deed of 1594, apparently
unregistered with a qdzi (No. 48-50; Braj version, No.51), and Junaid
and Najm in a group headed by Sital in a ^zz-certified sale-deed of 1601
(No. 89).19 One presumes that these Muslim peasants were converts from
Hinduism, as was ‘All Khan, ‘son of Angad, son of Raghu,’ who at the
age of 50 years, appeared as a guarantor of a land-sale at Vrindavan in a
gazz-certified deed of 1654 (No. 202). (He also appears in Nos. 180, 187,
and 218.) The reverse process in the change of religion could also have
occurred. ‘All Khan’s namesake at the village Arith (Radhakund) had a
son named Gulal, whose son, in turn, bore the name of Har Rai (NAI-
26911: 11, = No. 325). Such abandonment of Islam was a capital offence
under Islamic law, and yet here in 1717 the Qazi of the pargana Sahar,
Muhammad Hafiz, certified the original deed in which Har Rai appeared
as a seller, with his grandfather’s Muslim name clearly stated, without the
Qazi taking any notice of this apparent case of apostacy.
   An interesting feature of these ‘registered’ deeds is that Hindu women
are recognised as independent parties and proprietors without any demur.
Usually, their rights seem to have accrued to them as widows often through
a claim on their husbands’ property, as shown by two ^zz-registered
deeds of 1732, relating to property at Mathura and Vrindavan: in the
first of these (No. 391A) three widows, without any male co-sharers, and
in the second (No. 392A), two widows with male co-sharers, appear as
sellers. In 1669 the payment of a sum due to a woman Isarwi, on account
of a claim to house-materials belonging to her deceased father, is duly
certified by the qazi ‘after obtaining Ms Isarwi’s consent’ (No. 228). In
1693 the qdzi similarly certified the sale of a plot in Vrindavan by a widow
along with her two daughters (No. 252).
   When a woman did not authorise any male representative (wakil), she
had to make a personal appearance before the qdzi\ and, in such cases,
women had to submit to their physical appearance (huliya) being recorded
in the registered deed. To take the case of Ms Isarwi, just mentioned, her
description in the document of 1669 (No. 228) is as follows:




   19 On the Gaurua peasants of this area see Growse, District Memoir, 3rd, ed.,
pp. 376-77; also D. L. Drake-Brockman, Muttra: A Gazetteer, Allahabad, 1911,
pp. 332-33.
                         Dealing with Multiplicity                      119

Physical Appearance: Ms Isarwi, deponent. Wheatish complexion. Broad
forehead. Wide eyebrows.'Eyes, dark grey. High nose. One black mole on left
cheek. Age about fifty years.

   Incidentally, she had also to sign, which she did by marking a rough
cross, showing thereby that she was not literate. Similar descriptions of
women deponents occur in Doc. No. 253, of 1693, where Ms Ramkunwar,
instead of being credited with a mole, is said to have a hole in the left
nostril; and in No. 391A of 1732, where both women deponents are stated
to have their left nostrils and both ears pierced, while Ms Dayali had
a mole below her right eye as well. Clearly, the purdah system did not
operate here. One is left to wonder what happened when Muslim women
appeared before the qdzi.
   While, as might be clear from the above, qdzi-cerufied documents
that have survived are fairly numerous, this cannot be said of the texts
of judgements the qdzis delivered upon disputes brought before them.
From this point of view much interest attaches to the original text of the
decision of the then qdzi of Mathura, Muhammad ‘Arif, that he recorded
on 27 February 1675. The document is preserved in the National Archives
(NAI-2671/13=our No. 234), and shows how the qdzi proceeded in a
matter in which both parties, viz., Seo Ram, the custodian of the Govind-
dev temple, and Arjun, his alleged tenant, were Hindus.
   The qdzi states that Hir Ram, representing Seo Ram Gosain, appeared
in his court, bringing with him one Arjun. He alleged, on behalf of his
principal, that seven years earlier Seo Ram had given out to Arjun his
house (baveli) in Mathura, the situation of it being carefully described, on
a monthly rent of half a rupee, this being entered in a written agreement,
endorsed by witnesses, whom he had also brought with him. When the
temple (dehra) of Keshav Rai was destroyed (in 1670), Seo Ram had left
Mathura for Kaman. Now, when he returned, he found Arjun refusing to
leave the house or pay the rent, on the pretended ground that the house
was his own. Hir Ram prayed that the Qazi should order his principal’s
rights to be restored. On being asked to reply, Arjun denied his ever
having agreed to pay rent and claimed that his written admission to do so
was not genuine. Thereupon the complainant was asked to present proof,
and he presented two witnesses, who had signed the original document,
and they affirmed on their ‘customary oath’ (qasm-i mutaarif) that Arjun
had in their presence written out the undertaking for rent in ‘Hindawi
characters’.
   The qazl, in face of this disagreement, decided to go to the spot,
accompanied by Anbiya, the Superintendent of the Court (J)arogha-i
120                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 ‘Addlat), chaudhuris (headmen), and other Hindus to take evidence
 directly from the people of the neighbourhood. There seven persons
were encountered, all named, including two Brahmans and one woman
 (‘GangadasI, daughter of Kishandas, son of Kaun Rai’)- They all stated on
 oath, in front of the two parties, that the property belonged to Gosa’in
 Seo Ram and that Arjun’s own elders (huzurgdn) had resided there as
tenants, duly paying rent.
    The facts being thus established, the Qdzi ordered that the accused
 must surrender the house to the complainant and not vex him thereafter.
Apparently, no orders were given about the arrears of rent due for past
years.
    Although the mufii (jurist) is not represented as being present in these
proceedings, his seal (‘All, mufti-i Shar*) yet appears on the right margin
of the judgement along with those of the qazi himself and the ddrogha-i
 ‘adalat.
    While one may suspect, given the general repute of qazis, that bribes
privily offered might have oiled the judicial machinery quite frequently,
it must be admitted that on paper the judgement is represented as having
been reached after extra care had been exercised to get at the truth. The
qazi even entertained the oral evidence of the woman GangadasI, although
in Muslim law the testimony of a single woman is valueless.
    As we have noted, while the qazi decided issues of civil rights, matters
like crimes and acts of violence were dealt with by executive officials such
as the faujdar and kotwdl, though the boundaries of their jurisdictions
could overlap. Here our records offer us accounts of two incidents where
the Mughal administration was called upon to adjudicate disputes over
alleged forcible usurpation.
    The first incident occurred late in Shahjahans reign and is related in
a bilingual document (No. 200) of 29 April 1654, which in its Persian
portion recites that Gauranga Bangall brought a complaint before Shaikh
‘Abdu’n Nabl, the faujdar of Mathura,20 to the effect that Damodar Das


   20 ‘Abdu’n Nabl was faujdar of Mathura, Mahaban, Jalesar, etc., in the jdgir
of Shahjahans minister, Sa'dullah Khan, being relieved of this post on the latter’s
death in 1656 (Salih Kanbu, ‘Amal-i Salih, ed. G. Yazdani, Bib. Ind., Calcutta, •;
1912-46, vol. Ill, pp. 319-20). Appointed faujdar of Mathura under Aurangzeb
(Muhammad Kazim, ‘Alamgtrnama, ed. Khadim Husain and Abdul Hai, Bib.
Ind., Calcutta, 1865-73, p. 573), he remained at the post until at least December
1667 (ibid. p. 1068). After some interruption, he was reappointed faujdar of J
Mathura in 1669, but was killed in a skirmish with the Jats soon after (Saqi J
Musta'idd Khan, Ma’dsir ‘Alamgiri, ed. Agha Ahamd Ali, Bib. Ind., Calcutta,
                           Dealing with Multiplicity                         121

of the Radha Ballabhi sect had taken possession of two trees under which
‘our guru" Shri Chaitanya (‘Kishan-Chaitan’) used to sit. Damodar Das
denied any wrongdoing. Both agreed to arbitration by two persons, Sabal
Ram Shukaliya and chaudhun Pitambar. The arbitrators settled the matter
by allotting one tree to Gauranga and the other to Damodar Das along
with strips of land adjacent to each. The Persian text was signed by three
Muslims, one with a seal. The Braj text below it, restating the terms of
the settlement, was signed in Nagari by eleven persons (all Hindus).
   This was thus a settlement in which the faujdar involved local notables;
and the state machinery worked as a mediator. But in the second case,
where the state machinery did get involved, much confusion and official
embarrassment resulted from an apparent conflict between the executive
and judicial arms.
   The incident occurred during a particular phase in the long period of
hostility that existed between the lines of the successors of Rup and Jiv
Gosa’ins, the former having pushed the latter out of the custodianship of
the Govind-dev temple through a decision of Mirza Raja Jai Singh, early
in Aurangzeb’s reign (No. 215 of ad 1659). The heads of the line of Jiv
Gosa’in, however, continued to occupy retreats (kunj) and a garden near
the Govind-dev temple. When Braj Kunwar, head of this line, died in or
about 1698, there was no male of adult age apparently left in the family to
succeed him, but his widow Kishan Priya continued to occupy the estate
with the support of her husbands followers. This was contested by Gobind
Charan, the current custodian of the Govind-dev temple, who now laid
claim to the property, since a woman could not be a religious head.21
The qdzi of Mathura, along with the news reporters (Wdqi‘a Nigdr and
Sawanib Nigdr) wrote to the Governor of tuba Agra in favour of Kishan
Priya, alleging that Nand Kishor Sayamanandi, who at the time was acting
on behalf of Gobind Charan, was trying to seize Kishan Priyas property.


1870-3, pp. 75, 83). Writing in 1782, Murtaza Husain ‘Allahyar’ Bilgrami, in his
semi-geographical work Hadlqatu’l Aqdlim, Nawal Kishor, Lucknow, 1879, p.
170, related this tradition about ‘Abdu’n Nabi Khan in his account of Mathura:
 they say ‘Abdu’n Nabi Khan in affection and benevolence was unique in his time.
He had so won over the hearts of the Hindus of that city [Mathura] that after
his death, Hindus still recite, Nabijl turn bin Mathura sum [Nabi-ji, without you
Mathura is lustreless]’. On the Jami' Masjid built by ‘Abdu’n Nabi Khan in
Mathura in 1660-61, see Growse, District Memoir, pp. 150-51.
   21 For the entire dispute, see Habib, ‘A Documentary History, etc.’, op. cit.,
pp. 131-160, esp. s.v. Gobind Charan (pp. 138-39) and s.v. Kishan Priya (pp.
146-47) (Chapter 10 in this volume).
122                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 Mukhtar Khan, the Governor, thereupon issued a parwdna, dated 19 May
 1704, to the local officials directing them to enforce whatever the qdzis
 court of the place ('adalat-i anja) decided. However, the same Governor
 issued a parwdna on 12 May 1705, nearly a year later, in which he
rescinded his earlier order and now supported the claim of Nand Kishor
 Syamanandi, representing Gobind Charan, and specifically ordered local
 officials, including Mirza Bahram Beg, the faujdar, Sayyid Sultan, the
 Waqd‘i Nigar, and Mir Madan (designation not provided, but presumably
 Mukhar Khan s agent in charge of his jagir) to expel Kishan Priya from
 the disputed property (No. 282, read with No. 283).
    The story is now taken up by a statement of a number of officials (No.
283). This tells us that having received the Governors orders, the faujdar
Mirza Bahram Beg, on 31 May 1705 ordered Shaikh Farid, horseman, and
four foot soldiers, Dudhram, etc., to proceed from Mathura to Vrindavan
 (officially renamed Mominabad) to expel Kishan Priya from the disputed
property. Kishan Priya closed the gate of the garden, but the next day
vacated the garden of Gawandas (?), which was handed over to Nand
Kishor (Gobind Charan s representative). In the afternoon Faqir Shah,
thdnedar of Vrindavan, and Ram Prasad, agent of the Waqai Nigar, and
other official staff (ahali mawali) also put in their appearance. But Kishan
Priya kept the door closed. On the third day in the morning drama ensued.
 Sukh Ram Brahman opened the gate from inside and came out. When
he was seized by the foot soldiers, he struck his head violently against
the wall. Now Gobind Charan’s representative Brajanand and others were
summoned from their homes; and Faqir Shah, thdnedar, and Ram Prasad
also arrived. Despite repeated demands, Kishan Priya did not open the
door. Finally, Sukh Ram, having contrived to get on to the roof (kothd),
jumped from it to the ground so as to hurt himself. Kishan Priya’s agent
(vakil) (not named) and Sukh Ram then went off to Mathura to lodge a
complaint (istaghasa) with the Qazi to the effect that Brajanand and Nand
Kishor had beaten up Sukh Ram and looted their money and goods (mal
o muta). Thereupon Jan ‘Ali Beg, darogha-i ‘adalat (superintendent of the
qdzis court) and Mir Madan asked the horseman and foot soldiers, as well
as the other staff, to explain their conduct. The statement giving the above
facts was drawn up in response to this demand, on behalf of the officials
and men involved in the incident. The fact of the matter, they submit, was
that it was Sukh Ram himself who had hurt himself by hitting his head
against the wall and jumping from the roof; and there had been no looting
by Brajanand and Nand Kishor as was alleged. The signatories included
Muhammad Faqir (Shah), thdnedar, who in his endorsement noted that
                          Dealing with Multiplicity                        123

a representative of Ghulam Nabl (who, we know, was in charge of Baitu’l
Mai, State Treasury, Mathura) was also present; so too Fat’h Chand,
agent of the Waqai‘ Nigar-i Shabi (Royal News Reporter), and two other
members of staff. Arjun Singh, accompanying Shaikh Farid, horseman,
and Dudhram, foot soldier, put down marks instead of signatures. The
net result of the three-day-long tumult, with its physical excitement and
some paper work, was that Kishan Priya remained in possession of the
estate, despite the efforts of all the Kings horses, and all the Kings men.


Escheat

In the Mughal empire, the property of those who died intestate was held
to belong to the emperor, and so could be taken into custody by the state
treasury, the so-called Baitu’l mdl. Badauni cites an order of Akbar of the
year 1594 to the effect that until the treasury officer (baitu’l mdl-chi) issued
a certificate of clearance in regard to claims on a dead persons property,
the dead could not be buried.22 In his twelve accession ordinances of
1605, Jahangir ordered that for the custody of such property where heirs
could not be found, whether the dead be non-Muslim or Muslim, special
officers were to be appointed, who were to use the income from property
so secured on ‘the construction of mosques and inns, repairs of bridges,
and construction of tanks and wells’.23
   The Gosa’ins of Vrindavan do not seem to have been affected by
the enforcement of this regulation until the reign of Aurangzeb. That
emperor had, in respect of imperial officers, issued an order in 1667 to the
effect that, failing any heirs, their property was to be taken over by officers
(tahvlldar) of the Baitu’l Mai.24 This order, however, merely recapitulated
the existing rules with some clarifications. In fact, all subjects, and not
simply officers, were covered by this regulation, as the Gosa’ins of the line
of Rup Gosa in were to find out in 1692 and thereafter.
   In 1689, Seo Ram of that line (whom we have already met) made a
gift (hiba) of his property to his ‘nephew’ Kishan Charan, and got the
deed certified by the qazis of parganas Kaman and Mathura. The property
included a house and two adjacent shops in Mathura (No. 242), Upon Seo
Ram’s death, and during the absence of Kishan Charan from Mathura,

  22 BadaunI, Muntakhabu’t Tawarikb. op. cit., vol. II, pp. 390-91.
  23 Jahangir, Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, ed. Saiyid Ahmad, Aligarh, 1863-64, p. 4.
  24 ‘All Muhammad Khan, Mird’t-i Ahmadi, ed. Nawab Ali, Baroda, 1927-8
& 1930,1, pp. 266-67.
124                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

‘owing to the uprising of the Jats (jutur-i Jdtdnf, Ghulam Nabi, the
darogha (superintendent) of Baituj Mai, Mathura, seized the property
and appropriated the rent paid by the tenants. Kishan Charan succeeded
through an agent (vakil) in persuading an official, Mir Husaini, of the
Bayutdt (Imperial Property and Household Department), Agra, to issue an
order (11 November 1692) to the officials of the Baitu’l Mai, Mathura, not
to seize the property (Doc No. 251). In February 1694, Muhammad Baqir,
Mir Husaini s successor, issued a similar order, invoking his predecessor’s
instructions (No. 254). These facts were recorded in a document, dated
May 1694, prepared on behalf of Kishan Charan, on which he was able to
get supporting endorsements or seals from as many as eight local Muslim
officials, including a qdzi (NAI-2671/14=our No. 255).
    Apparently these efforts bore fruit since, when in 1696 Kishan Charan
himself gifted all his property, including the house and shops at Mathura,
to his younger brother, Gobind Charan, the hiba-nama bore the seal not
only of the deputy qdzi of Mathura but also of Ghulam Nabi, ddrogfea of
the Baituj Mai, Mathura (No. 277), though the general hibanama, Doc.
No. 262, which bears many Nagari signatures and three in Persian, does
not carry Ghulam Nabi’s endorsement. Yet upon Kishan Charan’s death,
the property in Mathura was again seized by the officials of the Baituj Mat,
Thereupon Malik Muhammad, Diwdn-i Bayutdt at Agra, issued an order
in December 1703 in which he took note of Gobind Charan’s complaint
and required the Baituj Mdl officials to release the property, in case the
facts as stated by the complainant were correct (No. 277). Nothing seems
to have happened until Izid Bakhsh ‘Rasa, Malik Muhammad’s successor
as Diwan-i Bayutdt at Agra, issued two peremptory orders (parwanas) on
the same date, 2 February 1706 (Nos. 286 and 286A).25 In both he pointed
out that this defiance of orders had continued despite parwanas from the
Governor of Agra, and his own two predecessors, Malik Muhammad and
Ziyau’ddin Khan. In one of these parwanas (No. 286A), he added that
all this was due to the ‘mischief’ of the mushrif (account-keeper) of the
Baituj Mdl, who had entered the house and two shops in the register

    25 Izid Bakhsh, a great-grandson of Jafar Beg Asaf Khan, died in 1707-08
(Mirza Muhammad, Tarikb-i Muhammadi, ed. Imtiyaz Ali Arshi, Aligarh, 1960,
vol. II (Part 6), p. 25). He left a collection of letters, Riyazul Wiidad (Br. Lib.
MS Or. 1725), covering the period 1673-95. In 1697-98 he is described as a
mansabdar posted in Agra, from where he accompanied the historian Bhimsen
to Gwalior to settle a dispute involving Bhimsen s employer, Rao Dalpat
(Nuskba-i Dilkusbd, Br. Lib. MS Or 23, f. 127a). His subsequent appointment as
the Diwdn-i Bayutdt at Agra, in which capacity he appears in the Vrindavan
documents, shows that he remained a middle ranking officer till practically his
last years.
                         Dealing with Multiplicity                        125

(fihrist). In the other parwdna (No. 286), Izid Bakhsh added the following
in his own hand, with a thick pen:

Let them act according to the above and so behave that no harm comes to God’s
people. Follow strictly the orders in this matter.

   Even this reprimand did not immediately prove effectual, so on
28 February 1706, with all these documents in hand, Brajanand, as
agent (vakil) of Gobind Charan, appeared before the qdzi of Mathura,
Qutbu’ddin, seeking relief. The judgement was given on 16 March in
his favour, the Qazi directing that the seized assets be deleted from the
register and the shops and house returned to the petitioner as directed by
Mirza Izid Bakhsh (No. 286C),
   That, now at last, after nearly 15 years, the States claims on the rent
from the property were abandoned, is shown by the copy (No. 287) of an
extract from the Daily Register (Rozndmcha) of the treasury of Baitu’l
Mal, of Rabi 1, ry 50 of Aurangzeb (June-July 1706). This contains the
statement that the Governments claim to the rent of the house and shops
paid by ‘Tankraj, etc.’, and the rent collection (amounting to Rs.20 as.8
per month) was to cease by the end of Safar (12 June 1706) in terms of
Izid Bakhsh’s parwdna. The restoration to Gobind Charan of the rent
previously collected was apparently not contemplated.
    A later document which is relevant to the problem that this case hinges
upon is a parwdna of‘Inayatullah Khan, issued on 1 June 1721 (No. 356).
It refers to a petition submitted by Raja Sawai Jai Singh to the emperor
Muhammad Shah, drawing attention to the distress caused when, upon
 the deaths of Hindu and Muslim mendicants, their possessions, derived
from public charity, were seized by officials of the Baitu’l Mal who would
not allow their bodies to be removed for two or three days until they
themselves had completed their enquiry. The petition pleaded that this
practice should cease, and that in the case of the Govind-dev temple,
the possessions of the mendicants associated with it, who died heirless,
 should be handed over to that temple. The Emperor accepted the plea,
 and ‘Inayatullah Khan, therefore, ordered that the temple’s claims upon
 the possessions of the deceased mendicants who had belonged to it should
 henceforth be honoured.26


   26 ‘Inayatullah Khan was appointed Naib Diwan (Deputy Finance Minister)
on 9 February 1721, in addition to his duties as Khan-i Sdmdn (Hadi Kamwar
Khan, Tazkiratu’s Saldtin-i Chaghatd, op. cit., p. 334). Since the Khan-i Sdmdn
headed the Bayutat department to which the Baitu’l Mal was subordinate,
‘Inayatullah Khan could have issued this order in either of his two capacities.
PEASANTS
                              CHAPTER             6



             Land Rights in Braj Bhum
             during the Reign of Akbar
                 Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib




In Chapter 3 we presented the information we derived from Vrindavan
documents of Akbar’s reign regarding that emperors grants to the temples
of the Mathura region and related matters. We will now deal with another
set of documents of the same period that are primarily concerned with
the property acquisitions of the Chaitanya divines, as well as those by the
temples and their priests.1 These are of considerable historical importance,
since they enable us to judge, from the details of actual transactions, what
the nature of the individuals’ rights to land were, and where, if at all, the
village community stood in respect of land transfers. As an initial measure
we have taken twenty-seven documents, all belonging to the period before
the death of Akbar (1605), of which we offer a calendar at the end of the
chapter. These are mostly in Persian; but eight of them are in Braj. We are
greatly indebted to Professor J.C. Wright of the University of London for
letting us use his decipherments and translations of the Braj sale-deeds,
along with his notes on them. He is, of course, not responsible for any slip
we may make in interpreting these documents.12
    In the Calendar3 accompanying this chapter we have arranged the
documents in five sets, according to localities. The first set, consisting


    1 The original text of this chapter was published in PIHC, 50th session (1989,
Gorakhpur), pp.236-55.
   2 As Vice President of the International Association of VRI, Professor Wright
was involved in organising the project of exploring and photographing the
documents.
    3 Our Calendar does not profess to give literal translations except where words
are put within quotation marks. However, effort has been made to remain as loyal
to the originals as possible. Original spellings (e.g. Bindraban for Vrindavan) have
 130                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

of eleven documents (Nos. 1-11), relates to Arith, a village now known
as Radhakund, a name already found in our documents. This village is at
some distance from Vrindavan and Mathura, and was then in a different
pargana (Sahar), It may, therefore, be thought to represent the rural
conditions in a less alloyed form than Vrindavan, which was by Akbar’s
time becoming a pilgrim centre of some importance. All the other
four sets of documents relate to Vrindavan and its immediate environs.
Treating them in four different series will help us to better understand the
successive transactions that the documents describe.


                                        I

 Taking the Arith set first, the reader may be well advised to begin with
 Doc. No. 11, since it sheds important light on the nature of all the earlier
 documents. Here, in a deed dated 2nd June 1588, Goswami Raghunathdas
 declared that he possessed six plots of land in the village of Arith, holding
 them by different acts of purchase at the total price of Rs.238, and that
 he had now decided to gift them all to Jiv Goswami. For this purpose,
he obtained fresh deeds drawn up in favour of Jiv Goswami from the
 muqaddams (headman) who had originally sold the land to Raghunathdas
himself He then proceeds to list six plots specifying their limits, dates of
purchase, and prices, the earliest transactions occurring in 1546. If we now
turn to Doc. 10, dated 29 November 1579, we see that this is a declaration
to the effect that Kamana and others, seven ‘inhabitants’ of the village, had
sold six plots of land for a total price of Rs.238 to Jiv Gusain, represented
by Gopaldas Pujari. The six plots correspond to the six mentioned in Doc.
 11, as may be verified from the limits defined for each. One must then
conclude that this was really a fictitious deed which Raghunathdas had
prepared in favour ofJiv Goswami in order to make the latter’s entitlement
safer.
    But there are other deeds also in favour of Jiv Goswami, relating to
plots specified in Docs. 10 and 11. These are Docs. 3, 5, 6, 7, and 9,
being respectively the sale-deeds of plots 2, 6, 4, 5, and 3, as listed in
Doc. 11, with the same dates as specified there. They must, therefore,
be fictitious as well. The sellers in all of them, except for the seemingly
transcriptional omission of one name in Doc. 8, bear the names of the
very same ‘inhabitants’ who sold the whole set of the same plots in 1579,

been retained. Ilahi dates, as compared to Hijrl dates, when used in non-official
documents, seem to have been loosely employed and are likely to be inaccurate.
                        Land Rights in Braj Bhum                        131

although the deeds purport to bear dates from 1546 to 1577, a period of
over thirty years. Not only are the names of the sellers, along with their
fathers’ names, exactly the same, but the sellers’ names are also listed in
exactly the same order. The same qazi Badruddin Husain constantly put
his seal on the documents (Docs. 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11). There remains
little doubt, then, that these documents too are fictitious, to the extent
that they were all prepared much later than their purported dates. Their
actual preparation took place either with Doc. 10 in 1579, or, with both
Docs. 10 and 11, in 1588.
    This conclusion also makes any pre-1588 date dubious in respect of
Docs. 1, 2, 4, and 8. Of these Docs. 1, 2, and 4 purport to be deeds of
sales to Raghunathdas, and Doc. 8 of a sale to Jiv Goswami ‘through’
Raghunathdas. The plots mentioned do not correspond exactly with the
plots in Doc. 11, so far as dates and prices are concerned, but the sellers
are the same as in Doc. 10, identical again in names, parentage, and order
of mention. This is so even when Docs. 1 and 2 are dated 1538 and 1545,
and there is thus all the reason to believe that these two deeds were in
fact ‘created’ much later. In the case of Doc. 1, in any case, the reference
to ‘rupaiya* proclaims its fictitiousness, since in 1538 Sher Shah had not
seized the throne of Delhi and the rupee had not yet been minted by
him. We must, therefore, assume that for some reason Raghunathdas was
anxious to establish his claims (and those of Jiv Goswami) on the land and
thus created the fiction of successive sales to Jiv Goswami, which had not
actually occurred in the manner represented.
    We may thus take it for certain that irrespective of their dates, all
these documents in the Arith set were probably prepared very close to
each other in point of time. While this element of fictitiousness must
be borne in mind when we scrutinise the evidence of these documents,
it does not by any means reduce their significance for our understanding
of contemporary agrarian conditions. Obviously, the seven sellers were
actual individuals. In the Persian documents (Nos. 3 and 4 to 10), they are
modestly described as ‘inhabitants’ (mutawattanan) of village Arith. But
in Doc. 11 they are termed muqaddams (headmen). In Doc. 2, which is in
Braj, they are called panch mukadaman and if Doc. 1 were not damaged
here, it might also have so described them. They are also called panch
elsewhere in the relevant portions of Docs. 1 and 2 and in Doc. 4. Since
they number seven, panch cannot mean literally ‘five’ here. The sense
seems to be of their being mukadams (=muqaddams), holding a position
which is assumed to be identical with that of panch, in the sense of village
oligarch.
132                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   The names of the fathers furnished for each of the seven sellers show
that none of them were brothers. In other words, there is no reason to
believe that they were holders ofjoint-family property. Though they claim
in Doc. 10 that they were the ‘proprietors’ of the land sold by them, in all
the other documents they make no such claim, but say simply that they
had sold ‘the land of the village’ (zamin-t mauza'). It must be remembered
that Doc, 10 is a formal deposition they explicitly made before the Qazi,
and so has to carry the statement that the land sold was their exclusive
property. It would tax one’s credulity to suppose that in each of the six
plots they had equal shares of property as individual owners. The real state
of affairs seems to be that though not formally recognised by the Mughal
administration as headmen and so compelled to style themselves as mere
‘inhabitants’ in all the Persian deeds of sale, the sellers were in actual fact
‘headmen’ of the village body. As "punch headmen’ they disposed of village
land, and so were called upon to sell, or recognise the sale of, village land
such as that acquired by Raghunathdas through mere occupation or by
earlier purchase, to create the Radhakund and Kishankund ponds.
    Whether the amount of Rs.238 in fact changed hands or constituted
an imaginary price cannot be established, given the way in which, and
the purpose for which, the documents were prepared. The seven ‘sellers’
declared repeatedly that they had actually received the sums in question.
What they did with the money—or with whatever they received—is not
recorded. We would not know, unless further records appear, whether the
price was just distributed among the seven ‘sellers’ or went, in part at least,
into the village financial pool, from which the land-revenue was paid and
village expenses met.4


                                      II

The second set of documents (nos. 12-15) is the first of the four sets
concerned with Vrindavan and its immediate neighbourhood (for which
see Map 4). This particular set belongs to the village (and hamlet) of
Vrindavan proper.
   Here too, while the buyer again is Jiv Goswami, the sellers are numerous,
though not identical, in the different documents. The only exception is
provided by the pair of Docs. Nos. 12 and 13, where the sellers are not

   4 For such a village financial pool, see Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of
Mughal India, Bombay, 1963, pp. 124-28; also ibid., 3rd ed., New Delhi, 2014,
pp 144-60.
                         Land Rights in Braj Bhum                          133

only identical, but placed in the same order, though Doc. 12 is dated 1558
and is in Braj and Doc. 13 is dated 1569 and is in Persian. From the limits
of the land specified and the identical price (Rs.60) one can see that the
land transferred was the same. (The only particular detail the Persian deed
adds is that of the area, viz., 10 bighas, 11 biswas). We must then assume
that the Persian deed was drawn up to formalise the transaction for legal
purposes (by obtaining the qazls seal of certification thereon),5 or that
the Braj document bears an earlier, fictitious date, and that the actual
transaction occurred in 1569. Of the sellers in Docs. 12 and 13, two,
possibly three (if Manga in Doc. No. 14 is the same as Gawanu) recur in
Doc. 14, of 1577. Since Doc. No. 15 was written twenty-four years later
(1601), it is not surprising that except for two common names (one Bhana
and the other that of a son of one of the sellers in Doc. 13), the other
five names (one is lost through damage) are new. Despite this change of
persons, the group of sellers seems to be a continuing body and to consist
of‘headmen’ representing the village.
    Doc. 12 does not give the sellers any designation, but says that besides
the cash price of Rs.60, garments worth Rs.10 were given to the panch.
At the end, the panch of the nagara (nagla, hamlet) depose as to the
correctness of the facts in the document. Since the same sellers in the
same transaction are designated muqaddams in Doc. 13, we have a fair case
for arguing that the sellers were not the owners of the land in question,
but were overseeing the sale of village land, in the same manner as the
Arith headmen had done.
    The sellers are still called muqaddams in 1577 (Doc. 14). But a change
in their designation takes place in Doc. 15 of 1601. The portion of the
text is damaged so that it is not absolutely clear that it has used the word
zamlndardn (zamindars), but the qdzi while affixing his seal, clearly uses
the word zamindars for the sellers, ‘Sital, etc.’. Otherwise here too, as in
all the other documents of this set, the sellers do not expressly claim that
the land they were selling had been their own personal property. Probably
they still remained headmen, but as the use of the term zamlndar was now
spreading,6 it came to be employed almost as a matter of course for them
as sellers of land.


    5 It may be noticed that the year on the qdzts seal is ah 978, whereas the
document is dated 977. This suggests that the document was drawn up in the
earlier year but the qdzts seal was obtained much later.
    6 Cf. Irfan Habib, ‘Aspects of Agrarian Relations and Economy in a Region
ofUttar Pradesh during the 16th Century’, IESIIR, vol. IV, no.3, 1967, pp. 211-
12.
134                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   Document 15 contains another point of interest. Two of the eight
headmen are Muslims (Junaid, Najm) judging by their names. This
suggests that ones position within the village community was not here
affected by a change of religion by any of its members.
   One cannot also pass by ‘All Khan, the Muslim muqaddam of village
Sei, in Doc. 13, who appears as the thakur of village Sei in Doc. 12,
with the further appellation of Chaudhurl. Obviously, he was more than
a headman, not to be put in the same class as the set of numerous sellers
we have so far been dealing with. He acted alone: having first obtained
land in Vrindavan, he then passed it on to Jiv Goswami. The term thakur,
therefore, expresses his position better, and in the official terminology
that would soon come into use he would be properly entitled to the
designation of zamindar. The avoidance of the word chaudhuri for him in
the Persian deed suggests that ‘Ali Khan was chaudhurl by status; he was
not an official of that designation.


                                    Ill

Docs. 16-20, all belonging to just two years, 1593 and 1594, relate to the
hamlet (nagla) Nagu of village Dosaij or Dosaich (now Dusayat, part of
the town ofVrindavan). In Docs. 16, 17, and 20 Goswami Haridas is the
buyer, in Doc. 18 the purchase is made on behalf of Raja Man Singh, the
ruler of Amber, by Haridas as an agent of his. These three documents
mention the reigning Emperor (Akbar), as well as the karori (or Imperial
Revenue Collector) of the sarkdr and, in two places, his subordinate,
the shiqqddr of pargana Mathura. This pair of officials is mentioned in
yet another document (No. 25) of 1598, in which Haridas once again
appears as the purchaser. In Docs. 18 and 23 the karori Mathuradas alone
is referred to. In Docs. 17 and 18 the sarkdr of Bayana is said to have been
under the charge of the karori and in Doc. 20 it is the tarafor tract of
Mathura that is placed under him. There was no sarkdr of Bayana now,
but there had been one once, and Mathura was still within the dastur-
circle of Bayana.7 These references to the Karori also show that during the
years 1593-8, Mathura and Vrindavan were part of the Khalisa (territory
under Imperial management) and not in the jagir of any noble. The
karori, we may remember, was an official of the khalisa; ajagirdar’s revenue
collector could only be called ‘dmil. Besides these pieces of information,

  7 Cf. our comments on this point in PIHC, 48th session, 1987, p. 245 (our
Chapter 3).
                         Land Rights in Braj Bhum                          135

the references to the karori and shiqqdar are only idiosyncrasies of Haridas
or his favourite draftsman, and cannot be held to mean that these two
worthies—any more than Emperor Akbar—were either present at, or in
any manner verified or guaranteed the sale. The documents too make
no such statement, the mention of officials being apparently merely to
reinforce the date and not to invoke their authority. Doc. 19, on the
contrary, was at least made before the hakim, the man-in-authority over
the area, that is, the local official appointed by either a jagirdar, or, if in
Khdlisa, the karori. One would have thought this was because Raja Man
Singh was a party here, if the same kind of statement had not been made
in three other documents of sale where a plebeian is the purchaser.8
   It would seem that the five documents of this set are divisible into
two classes. In the first class we have Doc. 16, 17, and 18, which record
transactions where individual persons could be selling their rights. In
Doc. 16, we have land, which is obviously on the way to becoming, if
it has not already become, township land. It belongs to a pati (patti) or
portion of the hamlet (nagard) of the Govind-dev temple. The sellers are
four in number, all brothers, and could have been joint-holders of the
land. In Docs. 17 and 18, there are two sellers each, and they again could
be disposing their own joint holding. The boundaries of the land given
in Doc. 17 reinforce this impression, since the fields of individuals who
are named are recorded on all sides, and among whom we find one of the
sellers, Nagu, himself.
   The second class consists of Docs. 19 and 20, where the picture is
markedly different. We have here as many as thirteen sellers, described in
Doc. 20 first as ‘Braj inhabitants of Shri Vrindavan’, and then as ‘all the
panch, acting jointly’ (savpanchan milikari). ‘All the panch’ are also made
to declare that the sale had actually been affected. The land sold is called
vithal-wari, presumably meaning land which could only produce stunted
crop (baithal),9 and thus otherwise waste. This would be the kind of land
which would be no mans land, and where accordingly the community
would have the sole voice in its disposal.
   Of the thirteen sellers, three are Muslims, viz., Nijam (Nizam), Hamau
or Humyan (Humayun), and Naso (Nasir?). The last would not have been
recognised as a Muslim, but for the spelling of his name in Doc. 19, with
an Arabic swad (s) used, and not an ordinary ‘s’, which implies that the
writer felt the villager’s name was a corruption of the Arabic Nasir, or

   8 Docs. 21-22 and 23 similarly state that the transactions were made ‘before
the Hakim.
   ’ See G.A. Grierson, Bihar Peasant Life, Delhi, 1975, p.269.
136                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Nasir. This again underlines the fact that the panch of the village could be
heterogeneous in terms of their religious affiliation.
    Unlike Docs. 16, 17, and 20, which are all in Braj with much influence
of Persian, Doc. 19 is in Persian, and the buyer is Raja Man Singh; yet
the sellers are exactly those named in Doc. 20, and listed in exactly the
same order. There is no obvious element of fictitiousness here, since the
documents are only a little over six months apart, so that all the thirteen
‘sellers’ could have been alive on both occasions. In Doc. 20 they appear
as ‘the panch’; and it follows that in Doc. 19 too they act in the same
capacity. This may further explain why the order of names maintained
is the same: this was the customary way of placing each individual in
the hierarchy of the panch. The sellers’ position as the panch perhaps
explains the presence of the curious word hissa-i rasad, meaning share
to be divided proportionately, which they must have distributed among
themselves. Was this the remuneration they received for acting on behalf
of the village?
    Doc. 19 is interesting for other reasons too. It suggests how ‘community’
and individual rights could arise in the same piece of land. The thirteen
sellers claimed that they had lent Rs. 150 to Pathal Bairagi, deceased, with
part of which he had put up a structure (‘amid) on land belonging to the
sellers, which was rather small (4 biswas) in area. They were now selling
this ‘waste’ land, with the consent of Narayan, the Bairagjs disciple, to
Raja Man Singh for the sum of Rs.2O72. How the thirteen together could
have lent the Bairagj a large sum like Rs. 150 is not easy to understand,
unless those were payments made to the mendicant out of village funds or
raised by general contribution among villagers. The Bairagj was allowed
to set up a structure on the land, and thus occupy it without any act of
purchase. This nevertheless resulted in the creation of an individual right
in the land, and the sellers are careful to say that the Bairagi’s successor
had consented to the sale. The document, therefore, suggests that the
village community, through its accepted representatives, could only
dispose of ‘waste’ or unoccupied land; if the land was already occupied,
the agreement of the occupant would be necessary.


                                    IV

Docs. 21-25 record transactions in another portion of village Dosaich, the
patti or patl of Gopa, the deeds being made within the years 1595-98. In
four cases, the purchaser is Bhavanand, adhikari of the Gopinath Temple
                        Land Rights in Braj Bhum                         137

(the buyer also in Doc. 18) and in the fifth is Goswami Haridas, whom we
have already met. The sellers in all the cases are single individuals, except
in Doc. 21, where we have a pair. The actual area of land is indicated in
all transactions. The price of ‘cultivated land’ (Doc. 20) is exceptionally
high, amounting to over Rs. 14 per bigha (we take it that the tankas in the
amount of 2214 tankas mentioned in addition to the price in rupees, are
really dams or half-tankas, and represent as many fractions of the rupee
(40 dams = 1 Rupee)). On the other hand, the price is only Rs.4 for a
bigha of waste land in Doc. 22. How land prices could vary is illustrated by
Doc. 25, where one plot carries a rate of Rs.4 per bigha, but another only
Rs.2. All the transactions are among individuals, and there is no evidence
of any reference to ‘the panch* for their recognition or consent, even in
Doc. 23, which is in Braj. But Doc. 23 does give us some additional
insight into what the term panch meant. Mathuradas {Karori), described
as hakim (person in authority) in the Persian version, appears in the Braj
version as panch of the sarkdr of Bayana’. The word clearly means the
principal man here.


                                     V

In our last set, comprising two documents (Docs. 26 and 27), the sellers
made their position unambiguous by designating themselves ‘the panchdyat
of the village {deb)’ of the Gopinath Temple, the deh being presumably
a hamlet close to that temple. The names of only four sellers are given
(identical and with the same sequence of names in both documents), but
the addition of‘etc.’ {waghaira) indicates that the actual number was much
larger, and only four could be mentioned.
   The term panchdyat occurs very rarely in Persian documents. In a
document of 1730 from the district of Gurdaspur (Panjab), the phrase ‘the
entire panchdyat of the market {bazar) of the township’ obviously meant,
in this particular instance, the entire body of shopkeepers, who had agreed
to pay a certain rate to a local divine.10 In our present documents too, we
must assume that the panchdyat of the village meant the body of rural folk
who had a say in the allotment or alienation of village land that would
affect them all.
   Doc. 26 reminds us of Doc. 19, in that the panchdyat here was selling
land which had already been occupied, since it contained the house of one

   10 B.N. Goswami and J.S. Grewal, The Mughal and the Jogis of Jakhbar,
Shimla, 1967, pp. 157-58.
138                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Kishan Gangar Baishnav, apparently not a member of the village body. No
reference to any consent from the Baishnav was made, which is in contrast
to what was carefully done in the transaction described in Doc. 19.
   In Doc. 27 the word representing what was sold is unfortunately not
clear; but it refers to the necessity of the sale because one Khesu had
already sold a house (havelt) in the vicinity of the Gopinath Temple, The
connexion is not immediately apparent, but the need for acquiring or
erecting buildings seems to be the particular purpose behind the two
purchases. We are now moving into an urban environment. This is brought
home to us especially by the witnesses who appeared in Doc. 26. One is
the muqaddam (headman), Raghu, not mentioned among the sellers and
so possibly the headman of the main village of Vrindavan. But among
other witnesses there are three baqqals (Banyas), and one (Dayal) a sarraf
(money-changer, banker). The temples and pilgrims were now obviously
drawing business to Vrindavan.


                                      VI

Before we close, we need to note the constant use of the rupee, a coin
introduced by Sher Shah during his short reign (1540-5), as the basic
coin in these documents. Even if we disregard the early dates affixed to
the Arith documents, as well as the date of Doc. 12, for reasons already
spelt out, it is worth noting that Doc. 13 of May 1569 still quotes the
price of land in rupees, and so too the Arith documents, Docs. 10 and 11
of 1579 and 1588. The tankas, when mentioned (Docs. 20 and 21 of 1594
and 1595), were obviously for fractional use only. It would seem, then,
that Mathura, being on the main route between Agra and Delhi, tended
to take to the new silver coinage much earlier than localities placed at a
distance from the principal mints.11



   11 On the slow pace of the rupee supplanting the copper tanka in quotations
of land prices from Akbar’s reign in other areas, see Irfan Habib, ‘A System of
Trimetallism in the Age of “the Price Revolution”: Effect of the Silver Influx on
the Mughal Monetary System’ in: John F. Richards, ed., The Imperial Monetary
System ofMughal India, Delhi, 1987, pp. 143-144. Cf. also Irfan Habib, Aspects
of Agrarian Relations and Economy in a Region of Uttar Pradesh during the 16th
Century’, IESHR, vol. IV no.3, 1967, pp. 217-18, for the rather late (rare before
1592-93) use of the rupee in sale-transactions in the area around Bilgram (West
U.P.).
                         Land Rights in Braj Bhum                          139

   It may also be noted, in passing, that not much should be made of the
use of the figure 8 for V2 rupee in Doc. 24. Ordinarily, it would mean that
annas, the silver fractional pieces, 16 to a rupee, were already in use under
Akbar. But the document is obviously a late copy and when the copy was
made, the scribe is likely to have written the figure for half the rupee in
the same manner as he would have had in a document of his own time,
when, unlike earlier times, annas were in everyday use.


Calendar

ARITH

1. RD. (Wright 1A) Original (?), Braj, much damaged.
Sale-deed, Vaisakh Sudi 3, vs 1597/ad 1538(1): ‘written by the panch of
the (entire) village of Arith’, viz., Kamana s/o Kanhar, Salu s/o Dusa,
Adha(ra) s/o (Muga)sa, Majha s/o Gula, Gahaja s/o Asuya, Gobinda s/o
Chuha(ra), Baharana s/o Gangu, who sell to Gusai Raghunathdas for
‘rupaiya’ 80 (?). Written by Bisandas (Dhuti). Witnesses: Hodal Pande,
 [Tribhangi] Pande, Ghangu, Gujar and Thalu (Bagari).

2. R.D. (Wright 1) Copy, Braj
Sale-deed, 3rd day of waxing moon Baisakh vs 1602/14 April 1545,
‘written }yy panch of the village of Arith’. The ‘Panch mukadaman, Kamana
s/o Kanhar, Salu s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o Mugasa, Majha s/o Gale, Gohoja
s/o Asuwa, Gobinda s/o Chuhara, Bohariya s/o Gangu, sell land of village
to S. and W. of Radhakund (S. edge of cultivated land, W. ruined village,
mound on edge of dressed plot (kydn), to Gosai Raghunathdas for ‘rupiya
30, which all the panch together received’. Written by Bisandas Dhuti.
Witnesses: Horala Pande, Tribhangi Pande, Ghangu Gujar, Thalu Bagari.

3. M.M. 14, 17. Copy, verified by Qdzi Zainul ‘Abidin; seal year ah 1140
/ad 1727-8. Persian.
Sale-deed, 17 Sha‘ban 953/13 October 1546, bearing seal of Qazi
Badruddin. Ka[ma]na s/o Kanhar, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o Mogsa,
Majha s/o Gull, Gohaja s/o Aswa, Gobinda s/o Chohra, and Bahorna s/o
Ganga, ‘inhabitants’ of village Arith i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, sell
‘land of the village* to S. and W. of the village for rupees 30, ‘good, of full
weight*, to Ji Gusain (so spelt) s/o Ballabh Gusain [Deed listed in Doc.
10 Plot (2)].
140                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

4. R.D. (Wright 2) Copy, by same copyist as of Doc. 2. Braj.
Sale-deed 13th day of waning moon, Jeth, vs 1605 (?)/6 May 1548(?).
(The year can also be read vs 1625 = ad 1567-8). The Panch, inhabitants
of village Arith, sell to Raghunathdas land S. of Krishnakund, beyond the
upper part of the village to the edge of the dressed plot, for rupiya 20’ and
4 pieces of cloth (pichora), taken by the panch (panchan line). Declarants:
Kamana, Salu, Adhara, Maj ha, Gauhaja, and Gobinda. Witnesses:
Tribhangi Pande, Dasu Pande, Be'bu Pande, Gopaldas Kohiya, Dhanuwa
Pande, and Rauwakhar Hathu.

5. M.M. 5. Copy, verified by Qdzi (seal, torn). Persian
Sale-deed, 9 Jumada II (year torn), bearing seal of Qazi Badruddin. Kamana
s/o Kanharu, Salua s/o Dusa. Adhara s/o Mogsa, Majha s/o Gull, Gohaja
s/o Asua, Gobinda s/o Chuhara, and Adhona [? Bahorma ?] s/o Ganga,
‘inhabitants’ of vill. Arith, i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, sell ‘land of the
said Kund’, all situated N. of bank of the pond (ghat) and large nim tree to
the edge of the dressed plot, for Rupees 64, ‘good, of full weight’, to Jiv
Gusain s/o Balhab Gusa in.
   Year possibly ah 985, Possibly it is the same as the Doc. of 9 Jumada
II 985 cited in Doc. No. 11 (plot (6)). The Christian era date could then
be 24 August 1577.

6. M.M. 7. Copy, verified by Qazi, seal. Persian.
Sale-deed, 15 Jumada II 985/30 August, 1577, bearing seal of Qazi
Badruddin: Kamana s/o Kanharu, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o Mogsa,
Majha s/o Gali, Gohaja s/o Asua, Gobinda s/o Chauhra and Bahorna s/o
Ganga. ‘inhabitants’ of village Arith, i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, sell
to Ji Gusain s/o Balhab Gusain, land of village appertaining to Kishankund
to S. of Do-ghat and the bins tree, for Rupees 20 (or 8) good, of full
weight’. Same land recorded in Doc. 11 (plot (4)).

6A. M.M. 11, 18. Copy, verified by Qdzi Zainul "Abidin (seal): year
1145/1732-3,
The text is the same as of Doc. 6, except that the year is written as 995
though the day of the month and the month are the same, 15 Jumada II
995 would correspond to 23 May 1587.

7. M.M. 8, Copy, verified by Qdzi Qutbuddin Husain. Persian
Sale-deed, 11 Rajab 985/24 September 1577, bearing seal of Qazi
Badru’ddin. Kishna (Kamana) s/o Kanhara, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o
Mogsa, Majha s/o Gali, Gohaja s/o Asua, Gobinda s/o Chauhar and
                        Land Rights in Braj Bhum                         141

Bahorna s/o Ganga, ‘inhabitants’ of village Arith, i.e. Radhakund, pargana
Sahar, sell land of the village, including ‘well of the tank’ (chah-i tdldb),
towards the north, for Rs. 14' ‘good and of full weight’, to Ji Gusain s/o
Ballabh Gusain. Some names of sellers are obviously corrupted in this
copy. Cf. Doc. 11/plot (5).

8. A/.M. 10. Copy, verified by Qazi Qutbuddin Husain, seal-year:
1128/1716. Persian.
Sale-deed, 12 Rajab 985/25 September 1577, bearing seal of Qazi
Badru’ddin. Kamana s/o Kanhar, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o Mogsa, Maj ha
s/o [Gali], Gohaja s/o Asua, and Gobinda s/o Chauhara, ‘inhabitants’
of village Arith. i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, sell land of the village
towards the N. from the big neem tree to the passage towards the tank
(tdldb) for Rupees 44, through Raghunathdas, to Ji Gusain s/o Balhab
Gosain.

9. M.M. 6 Copy verified by Qdzi (illegible seal). Persian.
Sale-deed, 9 Safar 986/17 April 1578, bearing seal of Qazi Badru’ddin.
Kamana s/o Kanharu, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o Mogsa, Maj ha s/o
Gali, Gohaja s/o Asua, Gobinda s/o Chauhara, and Bahorna s/o Ganga,
‘inhabitants’ of village Arith i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, sell land of
the village appertaining to Kishankund, and having towards the N., large
karail tree and Gobinda’s well, towards the E., the bins tree, and towards
the S., the temple (devala) of Mahadev, for 80 Rupees of current coinage
(sikka-i hdl) to Ji Gusain s/o Balhab Gusain [Deed listed in Doc. 11 (Plot
(3))].

10. R.D. 11. Original, Persian.
Declaration, 9 Shawwal 987/29 November 1579, bearing seal of Qazi
Badruddin Husain. Kamana s/o Kanhar, Salua s/o Dusa, Adhara s/o
Mogsa, Majha s/o Gall, Gohanja s/o Asua, Gobinda, s/o Chauhara and
Bahorna s/o Ganga of village Arith, i.e. Radhakund, pargana Sahar, testify
at the (Qazi's) court at the township of Sahar that waste-land (zamin-i
ufiada) in the neighbourhood of Radhakund, comprising the following
six plots, had been in their ‘possession and proprietary occupation’ (haqq
o milk o qabz o tasarruf-i mdlikdna).
   Plot (1) Bounded in N. and E. [of Plot (2)?]
   Plot (2) To the S. and SW of the limit of cultivation (badd-i medh-i
zira'at); to the W. along the lane of the mound (kucha-i khera).
   Plot (3) To the N. the big karail tree and Gobinda’s well; to the E. the
Nullah and the bins tree; to the S. the temple of Mahadev.
142                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   Plot (4) To the S. of Do-ghat and the bins tree.
   Plot (5) To the N., including well.
   Plot (6) To the N. the ghat and the neem tree to the limits of the
unsown field-bed (khatwari kyari).
   These plots are now sold, with full rights, for Rupees 238 of auspicious
coinage (sikka mubarak), to Gopaldas pujdri, s/o Radha Ballabh, agent
(wakil) of Jiv Gosa’in s/o Ballabh Gosa’in.
   The said agent (Gopaldas) confirmed the above on behalf of his
principal.
   Bishandas s/o Dhut and Sa.... Ka s/o Rasa attest the genuineness of the
right of the sellers. The sellers bound themselves for truth of the above.

11. G.D. 8. Original, Persian (Copy in M.M. 1).
Declaration, 7 Rajab 996/2 June 1588, bearing seal of Qazi Badru’ddin
Husain.
   Gusain Raghunath declares he had purchased six plots of land in the
neighbourhood of the tank of the village of Arith, pargana Sahar, for
Rs.238/- and, in full possession of his senses, he made a gift (hibd) of
them to Jiv Gusain, and in substitution of deeds of money-sale issued
by the said (sic!) muqaddams in his own favour, he had fresh sale-deeds
in favour of Jiv Gusain written out, as per following details, whereafter
neither he nor the muqqadams had any claims left upon the land; viz., 6
Plots (sold for) (Rs.) 238.

Plot (1):   To N. and E. Deed dated 21 Rajab 953/17 September      Rs-30.00
            1546
Plot (2):   To S. Deed dated 17 Sha‘ban 953/13 October 1546        Rs.30.00
Plot (3):   To N. Karel tree, tank, and well of Gobinda; to E.     Rs-80.00
            nullah and bins tree; to S. temple of Mahadev. Deed
            dated 9 Safar 970/8 October 1562
Plot (4);   To S. Do-ghdt and bins tree, 15 Jumada II 985/ 30      Rs.20.00
            August 1577
Plot (5):   To N. including well. 11 Rajab 985/24 Sept. 1577       Rs. 14.00
Plot (6):   To N. the gbat and the large neem tree, to the limit of Rs-64.00
            the dressed plot (kyari) 9 Jumada II 985/24 August
            1577

VRINDAVAN SERIES A: VILLAGE VRINDAVAN

12. Two copies, R.D. ser. 5, acc. 33 and ser. 21, acc. 37. Btaj. (Wright 3)
Sale-deed, 12th day of waxing moon Chait vs 1615/31 March 1558. Nagu
                         Land Rights in Braj Bhum                          143

and Gwanu, sons of Teja, Anarit s/o Tilaha, and Ahaladu s/o Sakatu, have
sold land around Rup Gusai’s retreat (kunj), together with the kunj, to the
thakur of Sei, All Khan Chaudhurl; and Ali Khan, having obtained it, has
given it to Jiu Gosai. The initial sellers, the panch, having received from the
last-named the amount of Rs.60 in cash and Rs. 10 in garments, the land
bordered on S. by the Kunj Gall (kunj lane) below the renta tree; on W.,
Kunj Gall below the myrobalan tree, the banyan tree included, up to the
bank of the Jamuna; on N. the bank of the Jamuna including the banyan,
the euphorbia and the silk-cotton tree; (and) on E, including the mound
dangar and papadi and rewaj shrubs. The panch of the nagara [hamlet]
depose that the above is correct. Witnesses: Darwe, Chachu, Kisandas,
and Bhim of the Chief Village (Bade Gdnw), and other witnesses.

13. R.D. 13. Original, Persian.
Sale-deed dated 5 Zilhijj 977/21 May 1569, bearing seal of Qazi Badruddin
Husain (seal-year ah 978/1570-1), with endorsement that he had put the
seal with consent of Nagu etc., muqaddams. Nagu and Ganu, sons of Teja,
Anant s/o Tihala and Ahaldar s/o Bhakt[? Sahkat], muqaddams of village
Bindraban, pargana Mathura, have sold to Jiv Gusain through ‘Ali Khan,
muqaddam of Sei, for Rs.60, land with the following specifications:
   Area; 10 bighas, 11 biswas
   Length; 63 [gaz)]. Width; 67 [gaz.
   [Note the length and width are inverted. The linear units are not named
but are obviously the gaz, for 20 gaz made up one side of bigha; and the
result of a calculation made on that basis would yield 10 bighas, 11 biswas].
   In the limits set to the area sold, the Kunj-gali is placed at the south
and west, while the bank of Yamuna is put on the west and the north.

13 A. R.D. 10. Unverified copy of No. 13. Left side much torn.

14. R.D. 145. Copy, Uncertified by qazi. Persian.
Sale-deed dated 7 Ziqa‘d 979/22 March 1572, bearing seal of Qazi
Badruddin Husain on the original, same endorsement as in No. 13.
Manga, Nagu, Anant, Kotu, Ahladu and Bhana, muqaddams of village
Bindraban, pargana Mathura, sell one plot of land to Ji Gosain for Rs.8.
Specifications:
  Area: 3 bighas, 19 biswas (rect. 2 bighas, 19 biswas)
  Length: 79, Width: 15 (gaz).
   N. adjacent to Kunj Gall; S. hins tree and hillock (dungar); E. pipal tree;
W. Kunj Gali.
144                    Braj Bhiim in Mughal Times

15. R.D. 136. Copy unverified by Qazi. Persian,
Sale-deed, 19 Safar 1010/19 August 1601, bearing seal of Qazi Badruddin
Husain, with the endorsement that he had put the seal ‘with consent of
Sital, etc., zamindars’. Sital s/o Nagu, Bhana, Parmanand, Biru, Syaman,
Junaid, Najm and (one name torn), Zamindars (?word damaged) of village
Bindraban, pargana Mathura, sell one plot of land for Rs. 16 to Ji Gusa’in.
Specifications:
   4 bighas, 14 biswas
   Length: 43. Width: 44 (gaz)
   Limits: S. Papri khunta (?); N. Kunj Gali; E. Kunj Gali; W. Pipal tree
(included).


VRINDAVAN SERIES B: NAGLA NAGU, VILL. DOSAICH


16. G.D. (Jaipur) (Wright 4). Original, Braj (with many Persian words).
Sale-deed, 6th day of the waxing moon, Savan vs 1650/ 23 July 1593,
during the reign of Shri Padasah Akbar Sah, and the term of the karori,
Rai Mathuradas, and of the sikdar (shiqqdar) of pargana Mathura,
Banarsldas: Sikham and his brothers (beradar) Puran and Ganga, and
Gadu, sell land of the pati Bhana of the nagara (hamlet) of Shri Govindji,
north of the temple of Shri Govindji, to Gusai Haridas pandit, adbikari of
Shri Govindji, at the price of Rs.93 chaukhuta (» chahar-goshd), of which
the sum of Rs. 10 has been received. All other claims to the land shall
be false. Declaration by Sikham, Puran, and Ganga, sons of Chitu, and
Gadhu s/o Baru. Witnesses: Bhana, Ahalad, Narawe and Ganesh.

17. G.D. (Jaipur). 3 copies, Wright 5, Braj (with many Persian words).
Sale-deed, 11th day ofwaxing moon, Agahan vs 1650 (24 November 1593),
during the time of Padsah Shri Akbar Sah, Rai Mathuradas Sahgal, karori
of sarkdr Bayana, and Banarsldas, sikdar of pargana Mathura. Nagu (s/o)
Guhaje and Shital, of Nagara Nagu, have sold to Gusal Haridas, adhikan
of Shri Govindji 144 bighas of land at Rs.40 chaukhuta, its limits being E.,
med (raised border) of Nijam’s (field); S., Nagus field and banyan; W.,
Toha’s field; N. Dois field. There is to be no dispute about Govindjis fields
(khefp. Declaration by Nagu and Sital (now so spelt); written by Naso.
Witnesses: Raj Shri Kalyandas; sikdar Jadaudas; Bhaia Ugrasen; Kashldas
Kayath; Ahalad Gaurua, Narwe Gaurua; Gawan Gaurua; Hamaua; Lakhe
Gaurua;...
                        Land Rights in Braj Bhum                        145

18. Gopinath (Jaipur) (IVS 208). Original, Persian, followed by Braj.
Sale-deed, 29 Rabi II 1002/22 January 1594. Ganesa s/o Marera (?) and
Sahib s/o Nanu Gaurua sell V/z bighas of agricultural land (zamin-i ziraati)
in patti Bhana, nagla Nagu (vill. Dosaich), pargana Mathura, to Swami
Bhavanand for Rs.4, at Rs.23A per blgha. The Braj version gives the Samvat
year as 1650/ad 1593, and the village (mauza) name as ‘Dochhaichh’,
in which Bhana Id Pat[i is placed. It places pargana Mathura in sarkar
Bayana and refers to Rai Shri Mathuradas as karori of that sarkar.

19. G.D. Original, Persian.
Declaration dated 16 Azur 38 (Ilahi year) [8 December 1593], but also,
29 Rabi’ II 1002 [22 January 1594], Invocation: Alldhu Akbar. Gahan,
Hardas, Sital, Nizam, Humyan, Naso, Jaimal, Ahlad, Narwl, Bhanan,
Ganesh, Lahnu (Halau?), and Bucha, inhabitants ofvillage Dosaich, nagla
Nagu and Bhanan, declared before the hakim (jagirdar/karori) of pargana
Matura, that Pathal Bairagi, deceased, had in his lifetime borrowed from
them Rs. 150. Some of it he had spent for himself and the rest he had
used for putting up a structure (amla) on part of land of the deponents,
which has these specifications; Length: 9 [gaz]; Width: 8; Area: 4 biswas-.
E. & S., public road; W. & N., waste land. Now, the deponents have sold
the said structure with the agreement of Narayan Brahman, disciple of
the said Pathal, along with their land, for the purposes of the garden of
the Raja of Rajas, Raja Man Singh, to Hardas, s/o Kaidar, for Rs.2014
chahdr-gosha, current of Akbarshahl mintage, the whole of the structure
along with the land being thus sold. The sellers have received the said
sum in front of an assemblage of Muslims and Hindus, and distributed
proportionate shares (hissa-rasad) among themselves. They together with
the said Narayan have got this written as confirmation of above. Witnesses:
Three round seals, one of Abdullah. Three signatures in Nagari, one by
the Kdnugo (Qdnungo). Two signatures in Persian: Sikandar s/o Husain;
Ahmad s/o Burhan. (Note: For meaning of bissa-rasad as 'proportionate
share’ see S.W. Fallon, New Hindustani Dictionary, Bananas, 1879/New
Delhi, 2004, p. 702, col.(a))

20. G.D. (Jaipur) (Wright 6). Original, Braj (with many Persian words).
Sale-deed, 2nd day of waning moon, Kuwar, vs 1651/22 August 1594,
during the reign of Pddsdh Shri Akbar Sah, the term of Rai Mathuradas
Sahgal as Karon of the taraph (tarafi of Mathura. ‘The Braj inhabitants
(Brajbdsi) of Shri Vrindavan, Gawan, Haridas, Shital, Nijam, Hamau,
Naso, Jaimal, Ahalad, Narawe, Bhana, Ganesh, Hulahu, and Bucha, ‘all
146                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

the panch jointly’ (sab-panchan milikari) sell a plot of vithal-wdri land for
Rs. 2014 chaukhutd and 4 (tankas) to Gusai Haridas for the purpose of Shri
Govindji’s garden (bag). [Same transaction as recorded in Doc. 19].
   Declaration by ‘all the panch, written by Naso, that this is correct.
Deletions of some names of witnesses. Witnesses: Bhavanand Gusai;
Vishnuvichitr, Madhav Rai Bangali, Jadu Durgu, Bhagwandas. Also
declaration by Kisandas, waktl (agent/ representative).


VRINDAVAN SERIES C: NAGLA GOPA, VILLAGE DOSAICH.


21. Gopinath (Jaipur) IVS 209. Copy, verified by Muhammad Khizr, na’ib-
qdzi, seal-year: ah 1114, ry 46/ad 1701. Persian and Braj.
Sale-deed dated 3 Shahriwar Ilahi 40, = 17 Zilhijj 1003/23 August 1595,
(but 3 Shahriwar =26 August), bearing the seal of Qazi ‘Abdullah. Hari
and Chanda sell cultivated land, 1 bigha, 3 biswa without buildings, (Jhdrij
al-imranat) in village Dosaich, patti nagla Gopa, for Rs. 16, and 2214
tanka, before the hakim (chief officer), to Bhavanand, adhikari of Sri
Gopinath (temple). The sellers received the amount in presence of the
following (but names not given in Persian).
   Braj version follows, giving limits of the land sold and names of
witnesses: Chaube Bale; Chaudhari Kalyan; Ugrasen Kanaugo.

22. Gopinath (Jaipur) TVS 210. Copy, verified by Muhammad Khizr,
na’ib-qazi, seal-year: ah 1114, ry 46/ad 1701. Persian and Braj.
Original certified by Qazi ‘Abdullah, sale-deed, same date in Ilahl and
hijri as Doc. No. 21 (=23 August 1595). Raghu s/o Chalis (?) and Bharon
s/o Lalu sell one bigha of waste (banjar) land in village Dosaich, for
Rs.4 chahdrgosba, before the hakim of the town (qasbd) of Mathura, to
Bhavanand adhikdri, in the presence of witnesses (names not given in the
Persian version).
   Braj version follows, stating that the land belongs to *patl Gopa ki
nagara defining limits, and giving names of two witnesses: Chaudhari
Kalyan and Ugrasen Kanaugo.

23. Gopinath (Jaipur) TVS 180 A & B. Copy (though not so designated),
Persian & Braj versions.
Sale-deed, 3 Shariwar Ilahi Year 41 (26 August 1596) 17 Zilhij 1003/23
August 1595. (The error seems to be in the Ilahi year, which should be
40, not 41, and then the Ilahi and Hijri dates would practically coincide).
                         Land Rights in Braj Bhum                           147

Gadhu s/o Piru s/o Bhima sells one bigha, 14 biswas, of cultivated land,
without buildings, in vilL Dosaich, for Rs.14 cbahargosha of Akbarshahi
mintage, in presence of the hakim of the town of Mathura, to Bhawanand,
adhikdri of Shri Gopinath (temple). Braj version describes the hakim of the
Persian version as ‘the panch of sarkdr of Bayana, Gusal Shri Mathuradas’.
Witnesses include Ugarsen Kanugoh [qanungo].

24. Gopinath (Jaipur) IVS 168. Copy (though not so designatedJ carelessly
made, Persian.
Sale-deed, 11 Tir 41 Ilahi (3 July 1596), 3 Zilhijj 1005 (18 July 1597).
There is probably some error in the Ilahi date, 41 Ilahi being a slip for 42.
   Saonli s/o Sahjo, aged 50 years, sells a plot of 2 bighas, 15 biswas, of land
in nagla Gopa, village Dosaich, to Gosai Bhavanand, adhikdri, Gopinath
(temple), for Rs. 18 kaldla(?)). Limits of land given but carelessly written.

25. G.D. (Jaipur) Wright 7. Original, Braj.
Sale-deed, 7th day of waxing moon, Agahan, vs 1655/25 November 1598,
in pargana Mathura, village Dosaich, during the time of the Imperial
(d'mir = ‘dmira) Kirort Rai Mathuradas, sikdar Banarsidas, Hari Beta sells
to Gusain Shri Haridas, adhikdri [of Govind-dev], two plots (1) Vi bigha,
bordered in W. by [land of] Ahilad, E. ofJadu, S. field and dressed plot
(kyari) of Manohar; for Rs.2, and 2 bighas of land on left side of road to
Mathura, E. (land of ?) Jaisingh, S. boundary of Pitha’s plot (kyari), in
(village) Rajpur, for Rs.4. Total area sold; 1V1 bighas of Brindavan land, at
total price: Rs.6. Witnesses: Sanwla, Sital, Naval, and Tanu. Written by
Kaith Mathuradas. Declaration by Hari, s/o Auhat[hi, Kachhawaha jdti
(caste).


VRINDAVAN SERIES D: 'VILLAGE’ OF GOPINATH TEMPLE.

26. Gopinath (Jaipur) IVS 156. Copy (though not designated as such).
Persian.
Sale-deed, Safar 1008, vs 1656/23 August — 20 September 1599.
Invocation: Allahu Akbar. Jadu, Sanwli, Parsl, Barji, etc., Panchdyat of
village (deh) Shri Gopinath Jiu, gave land of house of Kishan Gangar (?)
Baishnav to Kanhar Kaith for (Rs.) 25, (half of which, (Rs.) 12.8 (as.)).
Transaction firm, since Shri Gopinath is present.
    Witnesses: Raghu, muqaddam; Dilshah; Mehra, baqqdl (baniyd);
Bhawal, baqqdl, Bihari, baqqdl; Dayal, sarrdfi Mankath (/), Brahman;
148                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Chatu, Brahman. Note: Both the indication of 8 (annas) for half Rupee
and the way -nath is written show it is a late copy.

27. Gopinath (Jaipur) IVS 147. Copy ? Persian.
Sale-deed, no date, but prob, of same time as Doc. 24. Jadu, Sanwli, Parsi,
Barji, etc., panchayat of village Sri Gopinath Jiu, sell cottage (kutid, written
lutia) to the east (of the temple)—since Khesu has sold a house (haveli)
near Shri Gopinath (temple) on the west—to Kanhardas Kayat (Kayath),
sevak of Gopinath (temple). Transaction firm, since Shri Gopinath is
present. Price paid: Rs.40 (half: Rs.20).
                               CHAPTER 7



              The Peasants ofVrindavan
                                  Irfan Habib




As Vrindavan was the principal seat of the Chaitanya Gosa’ins, most of
their documents naturally relate to that township, which essentially grew
out of a few rural settlements near the village of Dosaich.1 The site of the
village of Dosaich is now represented by the Dusayat or Dosait Mohalla
of Vrindavan, 27°35’N., 77°42’E., situated about 9 kilometres north of
Mathura (27'30’N., 77°41’E), on the right bank of the Yamuna river, just
where it takes a short eastward turn in its general north-south course.12 To
the north-east of Dosaich was a hamlet (nagara, mod. Hindustani nagala)
attached to it, also called ‘Nagu ka Nagara’: the hamlet is first mentioned
in a Braj document of ad 1558 (Wright 3) and then in 1593 (Wright 5),
giving the hamlet’s longer name. Its situation is indicated by a Persian
document of 1695, where the ferry of Chirghat, which still appears on
the Survey of India’s Guide Map, 0.8 km. north-east of Dusayat, is placed
within its limits (Govind-dev coll., Jaipur). Another hamlet was that of
Nagla or Patti Gopa, which was situated to the south of Dosaich, since in
1598, land sold within it is shown as bordering the limits of village Rajpur
(Wright 7); and Rajpur stands south ofVrindavan (see Map 4).
    Our earliest document relating to land transactions in Vrindavan refers
to land transferred within Nagu ka Nagara. This is a Braj document dated


   1 Cf. Shireen Moosvi, ‘Vrindavan: the Evolution of a town in Mughal Times’,
in D.N. Jha, ed., The Evolution of the Nation: Pre-colonial to Post-Colonial: Essays
in Memory ofR.S. Sharma, Delhi, 2014, pp. 223-33.
   2 The most detailed map ofVrindavan available to me is the Survey of India’s
1:20,000 grided Guide Map of Mathura with an inset of Vrindavan. For the
environs ofVrindavan we have the Survey’s Sheet 54E 10, a map on the scale of
1:50,000.
150                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 vs 1615 (31 March 1558) recording a sale transaction, which is also the
 subject of a Persian document of ah 977 (21 May 1569)? On comparing
 the two versions, their sense becomes clear. The four persons making the
 statement of affirmation (tamassuk/iqrarfndmaj) (Nagu, Gavnu, Anant,
 and Ahladu) are the same, with identical names of their fathers, in both
versions. The difference is that while in the Braj version the four persons
 are called ‘the panch of Nagara, in the Persian version they are designated
 ‘muqaddams of village Bindraban (Vrindavan).’ Apart from showing that
Nagara was (now?) a part of Vrindavan and that panch and muqaddam
were treated as synonyms, the two versions establish that the transaction
involved land falling within the control of the village headmen in their
official capacity. This land had been sold to ‘All Khan, who in the Braj
version, is given the title of chaudhuri and the designation of jhakur of
 Sei’. In the Persian text he is called merely the muqaddam of the village of
Sei. He had paid Rs.60 (as purchase price) and Rs. 10 additionally towards
pahardvani (from Pers, pairdhan, upper garment?) for the panch. ‘All Khan
now transferred his rights to Jiv Gosain, the famous head of the Chaitanya
sect at Vrindavan, at apparently the same price of Rs. 60.
    There are two matters of interest here: first, we witness the right enjoyed
by a small set ofpanch to sell away what apparently was uncultivated land.
This kind of control by the panch over unoccupied land is well evidenced
by other transactions in Vrindavan as well as in Arith (Radhakund).3        4 In
a Braj document of 1662 from Nagar Nagu (Vrindavan), the distinction
between privately held and />anc/?-controlled land is put beyond doubt,
since it records simultaneously the sale of a peasant Hlra’s land (jimi,
from Persian zamin) for Rs.22, along with ‘land of the panch’ (jimi panch
ki) for Rs.28. Indeed, it is surely for this reason that six other villagers
(apparently the panch) appear in it as sellers, along with Hlra, the whole of
the land amounting to no more than 6 biswas (a mere 0.072 hectare, and
that size too only if biswas are of the ilahi scale) (Wright 14). Less easy
to understand is a transaction referred, to in a document (CU) with a text
difficult to decipher, probably of c.1707, in which two Vrindavan peasants,
Dundl and Manika, sold 7 biswas of land to Bhaiya Ganga Ram Prasad,
receiving Rs.72 as the price thereof, of which Rs.61 were appropriated by
‘the set of the panch (jamaat-i panchdn) of the said village’, while Dundis

   3 The Braj version is found in two copies preserved in Radha Damodar
collection (VRI, Ser. 5, Acc. 3 and Ser. 21, Acc. 37) and is deciphered in Wright
3. The Persian version also is from Radha Damodar, VRI, Ser. 56, Acc. 13).
   4 See Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System ofMughal India, 3rd ed., New Delhi,
2014, pp. 147-49.
MAP 4   VRIN D AVAN




                      Paiz Hob, b
                          The Peasants of Vrindavan                     151

son Beni Ram received the balance, viz., Rs. 11. Presumably, the land
concerned had belonged to the village, and so, in effect, to the panch,
while the two sellers were its secondary occupants.
    Second—to return to the sale made to ‘All Khan in 1558—the initial
sale was to a person whose village (Sei, 27°40*N., 77°39’E) stood 1014
kilometres away from the land sought to be purchased. Though 'Ali
Khan is described in the Persian version as a village muqaddam, his titles
chaudhurl and thdkur in the Braj version suggest that he was what would
have later been called a zamindar5 rather than a peasant elder. That he had
resources to invest in the acquisition of land would not then be surprising.
What is surprising is that he should have attempted investment in land
at such a distance from his home village. Did he expect that with the
demand for land growing in a developing pilgrim centre he could make
a gain from its sale later on, or was he merely expecting to get the land
cultivated at a profit, despite the distance from his home? Whatever the
case, a land market must have existed to make either kind of investment
possible.
    Another document, one of July 1652, shows that the right of the
panch implied a claim to a one-twentieth share in the tax, if not in the
gross produce, of peasant-held land. We have here the sale of the biswa-i
muqaddaml (claim to a twentieth on the basis of muqaddaml right) over
just one bigha (0.24 hectare, if bigha-i ilahi) in Nagla Nagu, Vrindavan,
for as much as Rs.17. This amount was obtained by three brothers, sons
of Jadu Gaurua, who transferred their right to Seoram, adhikafi of the
Govind-dev temple (Govind-dev Collection No. 39). Once turned into
monetary-income, the muqaddaml right could presumably also pass into
the hands of members of a non-peasant class, as in the present case.
    In the documents of sale of lands, careful distinction continued to be
made between ordinary peasants and the panch. Since the names of the
fathers and grandfathers and sometimes great grandfathers are specified it
has been possible to build up a family tree of one such peasant family in
Vrindavan, beginning with Jadu (son of Sandar Gaurua), who appears in
sale-deeds of 1599 and 1600 as a panch. It turns out that at any given time
only one member from amongst Jadus descendants was designated panch,
the principle of primogeniture being apparently followed.6
    Still, the number of the panch or muqaddams tended to increase with
time. Even in the case of the Jadu family, three brothers (one a minor of
 12 years) in 1653 claim to possess muqaddami right in a one-bigha plot

   s For the position of zamindar, see ibid., pp. 169 ff.
   6 Ibid., pp. 150-51.
152                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 (Govind-dev Collection, No. 39). Over eighty years earlier, in 1572, the
 personnel of the set of muqaddams in Dosaich appears to have undergone
 some change after the transaction recorded in Persian in 1569: of the
 five panch in the earlier sale Ganu drops out, but Kotu and Bhana are
 added (Radhadamodar 145: land sold for Rs.8 in village Vrindavan). By
 1594, the number ofpanch increases to thirteen (in village Dosaich, nagala
 Nagu, and [Patti] Bhana) with Ahlad and Bhana surviving from the set of
 five panch recorded in 1572. Of the eleven additions, three have Muslim
 names: Nijam (Nizam), Hamau (Humayun), and Naso (Nasir/Nasir) (sale
 of land by ‘all the panch together’: Braj version, Wright 6; Persian version,
 Govind-dev).
    Now, of these thirteen men, six appear as witnesses in a deed of sale
of land in ‘Nagu ki Nagara, by two peasants, one of them Shital, himself
a panch. Besides him, of the other panch appearing as witnesses, three
 (Ahlad, Narwe, and Gavan) are styled Gaurua, while Naso and Humau
 (Humayun) are not given any caste designation. Another peasant witness
Lakhe is also called a Gaurua (Wright 5). A panch in the set recorded
in 1594 may be the same as Ganesa, son of Murera, found selling land
in Nagla Nagu the same year (IVS 208), where along with his co-seller
 (Sahib son of Nanu), he is called a Gaurua. If Humau s field in nagala
Gopa continued to bear his name even in 1654 (Govind-dev coll., Persian
version; the detail is missing in its Braj version), he too was a Gaurua for
he is there so described. In subsequent times almost all the panch whose
caste is given turn out to be Gauruas: La'lchand in 1653 (Govind-dev 39);
‘All Khan, son of Angad, in 1654 (Persian, Govind-dev; Braj, Wright 12);
and Mankanth (son of La‘lchand), Dunda, and Madho in 1695 (Govind-
dev, Jaipur). It would seem as if all the panch or muqaddams here were of
the Gaurua caste, for no other caste name is suffixed to that of any panch
or muqaddam.
    Similar is the case with the ordinary peasant sellers of land wherever
the detail about their caste affiliation is supplied. Among those specifically
styled Gaurua are Lakhe in 1593 (Wright 5), Badi in 1604 (IVS, 183),
Sodaman and Saknl, sons of Bansi, son of Badi, in 1654 (NAI-2691/6),
the sons of Tursi/Tulsi also in 1654 (Persian version, Govind-dev; Braj,
Wright 12), Kisor in 1667 (Wright 15), three named sons of Sandal
(Sanbal) in 1701 (Madan Mohan 114), and Majhu in 1733 (NAI-2691/14).
One witness to a sale in 1599 is said to belong to the Jdti Kachhwaha
(IVS 156); and Kachhwaha was one of the two important branches of the
Gaurua caste, as we shall presently see.
    The Gaurua are Thakurs or Rajputs, whose status was treated as inferior
to others of that caste because of the prevalence of widow remarriage
                           The Peasants of Vrindavan                           153

among them. They carried among them the names of well-known Rajput
septs, such as Bachhals (mainly to be found in the north of Mathura)
and Kachhwahas (around Mathura).78While the A’in-i Akbari shows no
zamindar-caste against the pargana of Mathura, which was territorially
a very small sub-district of sarkar Agra, it shows against the adjoining
large pargana of Sahar (whose limits came up close to village Dosaich,
Vrindavan) the castes of Bachhal and Kachhwaha (between which are
sandwiched the names of Gujar and Jat) in the column for zamindars* It
follows that, at least, in this region Abu 1 Fazl was counting as zamindars
such castes as constituted the bodies of village panch or muqaddams,
though some of them must also have been zamindars proper to account
for the 200 horse and 7000 foot assigned to them in the Sahar pargana.
   There are only three instances on record where the actual cultivators
recorded are of a different caste from that of Gauruas. In 1706, among
the lands on borders of the plot sold is put the bagh (here meaning flower
garden?) of Parasram mdli, mdli being the professional caste of flower and
vegetable gardeners (document in coll, unspecified). In a chakndma of
January-February 1708 for 135 bighas of grant in Nagla Nagu, Dosaich, a
plot of 13 bighas out of the grant-area is said to be under ‘the cultivation
(kdsht) ofJuna Kachhi’ (CU), the Kachhis being a caste of reputed market
gardeners. And in 1725, among such fields bordering a plot is mentioned
‘the cultivated field (kdsht) of Kunja, bada-farosh (wine-seller)’ (IVS 207,
continued on IVS 213; copy, IVS 218). The last probably belonged to the
Kalal caste. The intrusion of these persons from non-peasant castes in
local land-holding may be explained by the demand for flowers, vegetables,
and intoxicants generated in the village of Dosaich as it developed into the
temple town of Vrindavan which naturally invited both the holy and the
unruly to itself. The presence of a wine-seller in the village is attested to
much earlier as well: in 1600 Gopinath, bada-farosh, who is described as



   7 F.S. Growse, Mathura: a District Memoir, 3rd ed., 1882, reprint, New Delhi,
1979, pp, 376-77, 380; D.L. Drake-Brockmann, Muttra: A District Gazetteer
(vol. VII of U.P. District Gazetteers'), Allahabad, 1911, p. 111.
   8 See Abu’l Fazl, A’in-i Akbari, ed. H. Blochmann, Calcutta, 1867-7, vol. I,
pp. 444, 454. The A’ins original tables were dispensed with by Blochmann; and
while Jarrett in his translation (vol. II) restored the tables, he changed the
headings and arrangement of the columns. Until a proper edition of the Am
appears, one has to refer to the manuscripts of the A’in-i Akbari for these tables:
I have drawn mainly on the British Library MSS Add. 7652, ff 209b-214a, and
Add. 6552, ff. 185a-189b, for suba Agra.
154                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

a Nirankali (believer in a formless God), gifts a small (one-door) temple
 (devala) he owned to Naraindas Misra (a Brahman) (IVS 216).
    The temples that lent sanctity to Dosaich also sought land-ownership
there. Already in 1593, a Braj document, recording a land-sale in Nagar
Nagu (Wright 7), notes amidst the bordering land ‘the khet of Shri
Govindjiu’, i.e. a cultivated field of the Govind-dev temple. In 1653,
another Braj sale-deed of the same nagara (Wright 11) records ‘a bdgicha
(small garden) of Shri Govinddevajiu’ as well as ‘a kheta* (field) of the
same temple on the borders of the land sold. In 1654, the Braj version of
a sale-deed (Wright 12, to be considered further on) testifies to extensive
khetds of the Govind-dev temple in the Gopa ka Nagara. A document of
1653 (Braj, Wright 11, as well as its Persian version, Govind-dev 39), also
puts (in Braj) ‘the khetd of Radhabalabha (in Persian: ‘agricultural land
(zamin-i ziri) of Radhabalabha) on the border of the land sold. Here we
have the Radhaballabh temple, which, as we know from Akbar’s farman of
1598, had assigned to it 70 bigha ilahi in Dosaich (see Chapter 3).
    We do not know how the temples got these fields on their lands
cultivated. Had they leased out the land to peasants, one would presume
that the lessees’ names would have appeared in the records just cited.
A chaknama of January-February 1708 setting out the plots, amounting
to 135 bighas, into which the original grant of the Govind-dev temple,
in Nagla (Nagu), Vrindavan, was divided, shows just 10 bighas being
cultivated by one Raj pahi (peasant resident in another village) and 13
bighas under cultivation (kasht) by Juna Kachchhi (of the Kachhi caste)9
(CU). The plots must have been leased out to the two peasants, but we
do not, of course, know anything about the terms of the lease or the
amount of rent they paid to the temple. One infers, then, that most of
the temple’s remaining land must have been cultivated by its servants and
hired labourers—or through temporary lessees.
    Since on such land the management of the temple paid no tax, any
profit secured from direct management or the rent received from tenants
would have been unalloyed gains for the temple. But in one case we find
taxable land also being purchased by the temple, which could only happen
if it was expected that some gain would accrue from it even after paying
the tax due on it: in 1654, two Gaurua peasants sold 3 bighas of land to
the chief priest (adhikan) of the Govind-dev temple, when, the Persian
version (Govind-dev Coll.) makes it clear that the land was zir‘i khardji

   9 For the Kachhis, a caste of skilled market-gardeners, see W. Crooke, Tribes
and Castes of North-Western Provinces and Oudh, Calcutta, 1896, vol. Ill, pp.
77-83.
                          The Peasants of Vrindavan                          155

(agricultural, tax-paying), and that it bordered on three sides the in am
(tax-free) land of Mirza Raja Jai Singh, and on the fourth side the kharaji
(tax-paying) land of Hamau (Humayun) Gaurua. It may be borne in
mind that though the tax-free grant of 135 bighas held by the Govind-
dev temple in Dosaich had been transferred by Shahjahan’s farmdn of
1633 nominally to Mirza Raja Jai Singh (NAI-2671/4, also 2671/5),
the Braj version of the transaction of 1654 (Wright 12) puts ‘the khetas
of Shri Govinddevji’ on all three sides of the purchased field instead of
designating it Jai Singhs in dm land (Wright 12), the same being the case
with the chaknama of 1700.
    The Persian version of the 1654 document we have just been referring
to is the only one in the Vrindavan collection that alludes to the burden
of tax (fharaj) lying on peasant-held land. We have to turn here to Abu’l
Fazl’s A’in-i Akbarl, which gives the rates of tax jdasturs) in money per
bigha-i ilahi (0.24 hectare) for each crop. Dosaich/Vrindavan belonged
to the pargana of Mathura, and the dasturs applied in this pargana were
those sanctioned for the Bayana circle.1011 The rates for Bayana, as for other
circles in suba Agra, are set out in the A’in-i Akbarl separately for the rabi
and kharif harvests, through a fairly careful tabulation.11 Eighteen crops
are rated under the rabi season and twenty-three under the kharif for the
Bayana circle. Mathura was close to Agra, but it gained from being under
the Bayana circle, whose rates compared to those of Agra were slightly
lower, but for a few exceptions. Thus ordinary gram is rated under the
Agra circle at 44 dams 18 jitals (25 jitals making a dam), but at 42 dams,
 12 jitals, under Bayana; and cotton is rated at 87 dams, 5 jitals, under Agra,
but at 83 dams, 11 jitals under Bayana. Since the prices in Agra and its
environs are likely to have been higher, such marginally lower tax rates for
Bayana seem to be what one should expect.12 Basing herself on the Agra
rates and using price data from the A’in-i Akbari and the output estimates


    10 A’in-i Akbari, ed., Blochmann, vol. I, p. 356.
    11 Ibid., pp. 359-61. Blochmann’s tables have been checked by me against Br.
Lib. MSS Add. 7652 and Add. 6552, which I have followed in all cases of
divergence from the Blochmann edition.
    12 See also table of rates in the A’in (indexed with Delhi as 100) for wheat,
barley and jowar in Shireen Moosvi, The Economy of the Mughal Empire, c.1595:
a Statistical Study, 2nd ed., New Delhi, 2015, p. 117. For Bayana see the 1st ed.,
of ibid., Delhi, 1987, p. 115. For the three crops the indexed figures are: wheat
(Agra, 106.48; Bayana, 100.00); barley (Agra, 115.82; Bayana, 90.81); and jowar
(Agra, 133.25; Bayana, 89.98). My own attempt at indexing shows only trifling
variations from Moosvi’s calculations.
156                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

and prices reported around 1870, Shireen Moosvi demonstrates that the
land-revenue under Akbars dasturs must have accounted for nearly half the
produce rather than a mere third.13 And this would have been true for the
 tax-rates levied on Vrindavan peasants as well, given that the lower price­
levels would have offset the slightly lower dastur rates there.
    One document, though late (1752), coming from the Jaipur archives
is of some interest here, for, while assigning the ‘village’ of Bindraban
placed within the jagir of the Amber ruler, it gives the jama1 of the village
 (nominal figure used for jagir assignment) as 1,75,500 dams, (nominally
Rs.4,388) with the more realistic estimate of actual receipts (basil) set at
Rs.1,437. In contrast, Bishanpur, an ordinary village in the same pargana
of Mathura whose figures appear side by side, was assigned a jama of
74,000 dams (nominally Rs.1,850) and a hdsil of Rs.606.14 Clearly, as a
village grown into a township, Vrindavan bore a much heavier tax burden
than an ordinary village. But how much of it came from the peasants who
were still left in the township cannot be established.
    We have seen in Chapter 1 that once Vrindavan began to develop into
a township, land prices began to rise, as illustrated by the rising rates per
bigha at which land changed hands. This meant that a number of peasants
in time parted with their land-holdings, selling at what they regarded as
favourable prices. Inevitably, this also led to mortgages where the peasants
would borrow against the value of their land. In 1628, when Kishan
Charan Gosa’in, adhikdri of the Madan Mohan temple, advanced Rs.30 to
four peasants while holding in mortgage 3 bighas of kyari or dressed plot,
he was entitled to receive interest from them but apparently obliged to pay
tax on the land (Wright 22). In 1743 his successor Ram Kishor advanced
Rs. 132 to four peasants (called jimidar here) at interest against land and
orchard valued at Rs, 137 (Wright 31). The peasants could not meet the
high rate of interest (which Professor Wright calculates to have been as
high as 3.788 per cent per month!), and so lost their land (Wright 32).
    As Vrindavan turned from a village into a township, and pressure
mounted on agricultural land, its peasants would have had to look for
land for habitation as much as for cultivation. This explains a bilingual
statement in 1706 by six named persons and others, who described


   13 Moosvi, op. cit., 2nd ed., pp. 108-111.
   14 G.N. Bahure and Chandramani Singh, Catalogue ofHistorical Documents in
Kapad Dwara, Jaipur, Jaipur, 1988, Plates 29 and 30. My reading of the date of
the document and the tax-figures is different from that of the editors, op. cit.,
p. 3. It may be kept in mind that the dams used in jama* figures bore the
character of a money of account, 40 such dams being deemed equal to a rupee.
                         The Peasants ofVrindavan                         157

themselves as 'zamindars of Sri Brindaban’. They had established their
huts on apparently vacant land belonging to the Madan Mohan temple.
When government horsemen (sawdrdn-i sarkdr) came to evict them, they
themselves demolished the walls and removed all the other materials.
They now affirmed that they had no claims over any material left on
the temples land, and admitted that it was unlawful to intrude into the
temples land, whether cultivated, residential, or containing a garden (MM
3).
    We need no sources to imagine that illiteracy was rampant in the rural
population. In 1640, five peasants in Nagara (at least two of whom were
designated panch) who sold away land, could only affix marks (nisani)
on the Braj sale-deed (Wright 8). In 1650, all three peasants acting as
sellers similarly had to scrawl marks (Wright 10). In 1654, all three
peasants selling land in Gopa ka Nagara affix marks, as do three witnesses,
including a muqaddam. Only ‘All Khan, a peasant witness, was able to
write ‘All’ in Nagari for his signature (dastkhat) (Wright 12). In 1659 all
six 'panch mukadams’ of Nagar Nagu who had land to sell had to affix
marks (Wright 13). So many persons in our documents have their names
recorded without even their marks, that one feels they could not even
handle the reed pen with their fingers to scrawl anything.
    Illiteracy existed side by side with ill health. One indication of this was
 the common occurrence of smallpox, of which we learn from the huliyas
 (physical descriptions) of persons who appeared before qazis or judges. In
 the surviving documents relating to Vrindavan in the period from 1653
 to 1734, we find a total of twenty-six peasants whose huliya descriptions
 have survived (we here eliminate reappearances of the same persons).
 Of these peasants ten, or nearly 40 per cent, bore pockmarks. On the
 other hand, among others including women, in Vrindavan, belonging to
 classes other than peasants, we find five persons who bore pockmarks
 out of a total of 20, or just 25 per cent. (None of the four women bore
 pockmarks; but a woman who appears in a slightly later document (MM
 25 of 1758), a member of a Mathur (high caste) family who sold urban
 land in Vrindavan, had pockmarks on her face.
    The huliyas also touch upon another custom, which probably had
 some superstition behind it: the piercing of mens earlobes. The practice
 seems to have increased with time at Vrindavan: in 1653, none of the
 four Gaurua peasants whose huliyas are recorded (Govind-dev 39) are
 shown as having their earlobes pierced, whereas from 1702 onwards, one
 hardly finds anyone, whether among peasants or men of upper classes,
 with unpierced ears. (None of the four women whose huliya is recorded
 158                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 in various documents were from peasant families. Nothing is said about
 their ears, but three of them had their noses pierced, all on the left side).
     From these mundane matters, one can move on to the peasants’
 religious affiliations. As may be expected, the overwhelming number of
 peasants of Vrindavan whom we meet in our records have Hindu names.
 But Muslims also appear by their side. The raised-mud boundary (med)
 of (the land of) Nijam (Nizam) is mentioned in 1593 (Wright 5); and
 in 1594 he appears alongside Hamau (Humayun), and Naso (Nasir)
 among the panch of Dosaich and Nagu, thirteen in number (Braj version,
Wright 6; Persian, Govind-dev). In 1601, among the muqaddams (now
styled zamindars) we find Junaid and Najam (an incorrect restoration of
 ‘Nijam’?) (Radhadamodar, 136). Subsequently, Muslim peasants cease to
appear among the muqaddams or panch, and one wonders whether this
disappearance is because their sons bore Hindu names. This seems at
least to have been the case with Junaid, whose sons bore the names of
Gorai and Hira, according to a Braj document of 1662 (Wright 14). On
the other hand, we have ‘All Khan, who first appears in our documents
in 1648 (Wright 9). His khet or field is mentioned in 1650 (Wright 10),
and in 1654, he appears in the important capacity of guarantor (kafil) of
a sale: he is now described as the son of Angad, son of Raghu Gaurua,
and as aged 50 years (Braj, Wright 12; Persian, Govind-dev). He was thus
a convert. He is finally mentioned in 1659 and 1662 as a witness to sales
in two Braj documents (Wright 13 and 14).15 Apparently, conversions to
Islam or reconversions to Hinduism hardly affected ones status in the
village or caste. Could one say, then, that while caste was fixed, religion
could be fluid?16
    Finally, a few words about the language the peasants spoke. Of this
we have no record from the peasants themselves, for, as we have seen,
they were practically all unlettered. For all legal purposes, the statements
of transactions had to be drawn up in Persian. This was a language the
peasants could not have at all comprehended. Thus for their comprehension
and consent as a party to any transaction, a version had to be drawn up
and written out in Nagari or Kaithi in the local dialect, which we now



   15 Yet another similar convert was Jahangir, son of Balbadar, son of Autam,
who stood as guarantor for the sale of a plot of land in 1731 (Radhadamodar
132).
   16 See Irfan Habib, ‘From Arith to Radhakund: the History of a Braj Village
in Mughal Times’, PIHC, 71st Session (2010-11, Maida), 2011, p. 294 (Chapter
8 in this volume) for the same inference from similar evidence.
                           The Peasants of Vrindavan                             159

call Braj.17 Since this had necessarily to be written by literate persons well
above the peasants in station, we may assume that this too was not exactly
the dialect the peasants spoke; but it had to be one, at least, that they
could understand, and so must not have differed greatly from their own
common speech.
    That this was so is obvious from the highly Prakritic nature of the
language employed in our Braj documents, especially those written so as
to be intelligible to villagers involved in the transactions they record. It
is practically devoid of compound consonants, and ‘b* invariably supplants
‘v’. Both these features explain the spelling ‘Bindaban’ used in them
for the Sanskrit form Vrindavan. The letter ‘b’ was represented by the
Nagari letter for ‘v’; in the very rare cases where ‘v’ was required to be
pronounced, a dot was placed beneath this letter. The consonants ‘s’ and
‘sh’ were not distinguished: thus Krishna was written as Kisan (e.g. in
Kisandas: Wright 3). ‘Ya’ tended to be pronounced ‘ja: so for Yamuna
we have Jamuna (Wright 3). Particularly noticeable in the dialect is the
frequent occurrence of Persian words. The conjunction ‘and’ is normally
represented by wa (pronounced H, directly derived from Persian; both
tathd and aur (or rather aru) are very rarely used. If one takes just one
document at random, a short Braj land sale-deed (1653) at Vrindavan by
three peasants, all of them brothers (Wright 11), we find such Persian-
derived words as jimi (zamin, land); mukra (rnuqarrara, established,
standard); mdlkal (bi’lkul, absolutely); khusa-rajd (khushi-razd, own
volition); tul (till, length); araj (,‘arz, width); had (hadd, boundary); mana
(mana1, forbidding); ugahi (gawdhi, statement of witness); and sahi (sahih,
correct). The Prakritic tendencies in transforming Persian words are
noteworthy here; but the extensive drawing upon Persian vocabulary is in
itself remarkable. Indeed, in such plurals as panchan (plural of panch) we
can see even the influence of-an, the suffix in Persian indicating plurality
(e.g. mardan, men).
    While, generally speaking, the syntax of Braj in these documents
conforms to Hindustani usage of later times, there is considerable variation
in both vocabulary and pronunciation. ‘That’ is represented not by wah/us


    17 It is to be noted that we are dealing here with a dialect that stands far away
from the kind of literary Braj of the Mathura district, samples of which G.A.
Grierson provides in his Linguistic Survey of India, 1916 (reprint, Delhi, 1990),
vol. IX, Part 1, pp. 271-79. To mention one difference: where Grierson's sample
for the Mathura district, on p. 273, has wd or even wah for ‘that’, ‘he’, ‘it’, our
documents have ta. Nor do our documents have aur as a conjunction; they have
instead wa (ba), and, only very rarely, tathd or aru.
160                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

but td‘, the possessive (feminine) ki (but not ka) is present but alternates
with kau or ko. For simple kar di (‘has/have done’) in Hindustani we
have kari dim. Forms of words vary considerably from Hindustani, e.g.
utdr (uttar, north); pdcbhlma (pachchhim, west); man manwahl (=Hind.
manayen, mana* karenge, ‘will persuade and forbid’ with mana* borrowed
from Persian); kalikal (Hind, kabhi kal, ‘any time in future’); karare (Hind.
kinare, river-bank); tlsd (Hind, tis, thirty); and mah (Hind, men, in).
   We can thus see how different this village dialect was from the spoken
Hindustani of today. It is far more eclectic, variable, and Prakritic than the
Hindustani literary languages (Hindi and Urdu). Not aiming at style or
rhetoric, its simplicity, directness, and lack of verbiage give it a character
of its own.
                             CHAPTER 8



             From Arith to Radhakund
             The History of a Braj Village

                                Irfan Habib




Less than 5 kilometres to the north-east of Govardhan, within the
district of Mathura in western Uttar Pradesh, is situated the township of
Radhakund, 27° 32’ N., 77° 29’ E. In the early years of the sixteenth century
there was a hamlet here, bearing the name Arith, with no pretensions
apparently to any sanctity. But then came the Gosa ins (Goswamis) of the
Sri Chaitanya or Gaudiya sect and the village gradually gained in size and
importance as Krishna devotees (and others with them) began to come
and settle here. This process, fortunately for us, generated transactions
and disputes, and so led to the creation and preservation of a number of
documents relating to them, which form part of the Vrindavan archives
on which this volume is mainly based.1


                                       I

In two Braj documents of ad 1713 (Wright No. 17) and 1716 (NAI-
2671/21), the latter also containing a Persian version, the jamldar-
mokadams (headmen) of village Arith (which belonged to the Mughal
pargana of Sahar) declare that ‘Jati Raghunathdas Gosai Gaudiya’ cut down
the jungle and, while buying land from their ancestors and inspired by the
Lady (ThakuranijI, i.e. Radha), discovered Radhakund and Krishnakund.
These are the two tanks that are found today to the east of the town, both

   1 For a more detailed description of this collection, see the Introduction to
this volume.
 162                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

within a considerable stretch of scrub shown in the Survey of India’s Map
 54E6. Radhakund, the much larger of the two tanks, is situated to the
west of Krishnakund.
   Now, Rughunathdas Gosain is known to us from a number of
documents that range in dates (as given) from 1537-8 to 1588. All
of these relate to lands acquired in Arith. From these and some later
documents, it is possible to obtain an impression of what Arith was like
when Raghunath arrived there. As was recognized by the inhabitants
later, the two tanks did not exist, and jungle or scrub covered much of the
ground which Raghunath then began to clear and within which he dug
the tanks. The cultivated area was marked by raised mud-lines (medb),
and there was much waste beyond the line of cultivated fields and dressed
beds (khatwari, kydri).2 Near the hamlet, there were small heaps of ruins
or old debris (kucha khera)3 However small a kingdom it was, Lord Shiva
seems to have reigned over it, for there was a devala (temple) of Mahadeva
here. A well was identified by the name of its owner or builder (Gobinda)
and was presumably of masonry, but this is not stated. There was a drain
channel (nala), by the side of the land sold to Raghunath; and a large
neem tree, a karel tree, and a his tree (thorn bush) served as boundary
markers. All these details come from two Persian documents of ah 987/
ad 1579 (RD No. 11), and 996/1588 (VRI, S. No. 47, Acc. No. 8). These
features are also recorded in the earlier deeds, in Braj and Persian, for the
transfer of each of the six plots of land, which the two Persian documents
of 1579 and 1588 just mentioned record collectively.
   Such documents, numbering eleven in all, introduce us to one set of
inhabitants of the village. These are the seven sellers who appear constantly
(with the seventh omitted inexplicably in two of the sale deeds). Since the
Nagari characters are likely to represent the names of the sellers more
accurately than the Persian versions, these are reproduced below from the
Braj documents:

1.   Kamna, son of Kanhar /Kanhar
2.   Salu, son of Dusa
3.   Adhara, son of Mugasa
4.   Majha, son of Gula/Gale
5.   Ghaja/Gauhaja/Gohoja, son of Asuya/Asuba

    2 RD 11 of AH 987/ad 1597.1 take khatwari in Persian characters to represent
khetwari. Kyari should properly mean prepared beds for sowing (Fallon, S.V.).
    3 In a Braj text (Wright No. 1), this is called ‘Gav kheda, village ruins, not
‘fields’, as provisionally translated by Wright.
                           From Arith to Radhakund                              163

6. Gobinda, son of Chuhra/Chuhra
7. Baharna/Bo(ha)riya, son of Gangu/Gangu

    These persons describe themselves in the Persian versions of the sale
deeds as just ‘natives (mutawattandri) of the village’, but in the Persian
hibandma by Raghunath of 1588 (VRI, Si. No. 47, Acc. No. 8) they are
designated muqaddams or headmen. In the three Braj versions of the sale-
deeds they designate themselves mukadaman (Wright 1A), and grdm-vdsl
(village-resident) panch (Wright 1 and 2). In the Persian versions the land
they alienate is called zamln-i mauza‘ (‘land of the village’), as in MM
Nos. 14 and 17 (of 1546), Nos. 7, 8, and 10 (of 1577), and No. 6 (of
1578); and in RD No. 11 of 1579; all the six plots sold are stated to be
zamin-i ufiada or wasteland. Quite obviously, then, the sellers were the
village heads, representatives of certain families within the village, who as
a group exercised control over the disposal of wasteland (the descriptions
of all the lands transferred show that no cultivated land was involved).
To what caste they belonged is not indicated in these papers; but in a
Persian sale-deed of ah 1129/ad 1717 (NAI-2691/11), the two sellers,
the second of whom is Ranjit, son of Jagannath, son of Jairam, claim
to be of ‘the caste of Gaurwa (Gaurua) Jadon, [and] residents of village
Arith alias Radhakund’. Now, in a sale deed of 1667 (IVS 190) Ranjit s
father, ‘Jagannath, son of Jairam, son of Sanwle, Rajput Jasawat, resident
of village Arith’, records the sale of his own land to two Brahman buyers.
Jasawat is another name for the Gaurua caste in the Mathura District. The
Gauruas formed an old Rajput peasant caste in which widow remarriage
and levirate were practised.4 In 1713 and 1716, Jagannath’s son Ranjita
(=Ranjit), of‘the Sanvle clan’ (firqa/thok) joins other headmen from other
family-clans in stating that the land acquired by Raghunath Das was
obtained from their ‘ancestors’ (purakhdn) (Wright 17 and NAI-2671/21).
By this reference we can presume that the seven headmen selling land to


   4 H.M. Elliot, Memoirs of... the Races of the North-Western Provinces ofIndia,
ed. J. Beames, London, 1869, vol. I, p. 115; Denzil Ibbetson, Panjab Castes
(Report, 1883), Lahore, 1916, p. 138 (‘Gaurwa’); W. Crooke, The Tribes and
Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, Calcutta, 1896, vol. II, p. 404.
In the Agra region (to which Radhakund, of course, belongs), the Gauruas took
their Rajput status seriously enough to enter military service. See the story of the
two Gaurua brothers from Agra, who went in Sikandar Lodi’s time (c.1500) to
Raisen to serve as soldiers there, in Rizqullah Mushtaqi, Wdqi‘at-i Mushtaql, ed.
I.H. Siddiqui and W.H. Siddiqi, Rampur, 2006, p. 36. This work was completed
in 1572.
164                       Braj Bhiim in Mughal Times

Raghunath Das were also Gauruas; and so we had at Arith in the latter
part of the sixteenth century, a peasant settlement mainly of that caste,
comprising possibly no more than the seven families whose heads appear
here as the muqaddams, or, with a greater modesty in description, 'natives
of the village’, able collectively to dispose of the wasteland no one was
tilling.
    There were possibly peasants of some other castes as well to be found
in the village. A Braj deed, professedly of vs 1602/ad 1545, has Dangu
Gujar and Thalu Bagari as witnesses. Gujars are a well-known pastoral and
agricultural caste, and Bagris are often treated as a sept of the Jats.5
    A peasant settlement needs services of other groups as well. The
presence of Chamars, the disposers of dead animals and leather workers,6
is attested by a reference to a settlement of theirs. In the Braj portion
of the sale-deed of a plot of land, dated ad 1667, its southern boundary
is said to have been formed by chamdratd; in the Persian version this is
described as ‘the thala of Chamaran (Chamars)’ (IVS 190), thala, from that
(cf thala), meaning ground, here occupied by Chamars, which Chamdratd
also appears to signify. In vs 1785/ad 1728, a Braj sale-deed records the
sale by two Chamars (also written ‘Chamar’), who were the grandsons of
one Manohara, of a small piece of land (Wright No. 23). So a community
of these leather workers also served the hamlet.
    At the other end of the caste scale were the Brahmans. One supposes
that the devala of Mahadev must have necessitated the presence of a ,
Brahman priest already at the time that Raghunath arrived to pursue his
project. A Braj sale-deed of vs 1602/ad 1545 (date presumably fictitious)
shows Tribhangi Pande and Horala Pande appearing as witnesses (Wright
1), while in a later deed, doubtfully of vs 1605/ad 1548, Tribhangi Pande
appears as a witness along with Dasu Pande and Benbu Pande. We have
no knowledge of what occupations these Pandes pursued in the village, •
and even whether like the two deeds, these are not also fictitious persons.



   5 On Gujars, see Crooke, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 439-54. For Bagris see Elliot,
Memoirs, etc., vol. I, pp. 9-10.
   6 ‘Originally he (the Chamar) seems to have been an impressed labourer1
(begar[ij) who was made to hold the plough for his master, and received in return
space to build his mud hut near the village, a fixed allowance of grain for every
working day, the free use of wood and grass on village lands, and the skins and
bodies of the animals that died. This is very much the status of the Chamar at
the present day. He is still the field slave, the grass-cutter and carrion-eater of
the Indian village.’ (Nesfield, quoted by Crooke, Tribes and Castes, vol. II, p. 169).
                          From Arith to Radhakund                             165

                                       II

Into this village, with a small peasant settlement and large area of waste,
entered Raghunath, a Goswami of the Chaitanya sect. The first documented
act on his part was the acquisition of areas of village wasteland (zamin-i
uftadd) from the headmen, which was apparently done in six separate
transactions, for six different plots (Radhadamodar No. 11, of 1579, and
VRI, SI. No. 47, Acc. No .8, of 1588). It has been argued already7 that
all eleven documents recording the sales of these plots, extending in their
given dates from ad 1537-8 to 1588, cannot possibly be genuine, since
over a period of forty years (from 1537-8 to 1578) they list the same set
of persons as sellers, without a change in even their order of mention.
Moreover, this set of persons is said to sell the same plot in one document
to Raghunath, and in another to Jiv Gosa’in.8 All the extant sale deeds in
Persian for the different transactions make Jiv Gosa’in the buyer; but in
Raghunaths hibandma in Persian (VRI, SI. No. 47; Acc. No. 8), of ah
996/ad 1588, the dates of these very sale-deeds supposedly transacted by
Jiv Gosa’in are given for Raghunaths own acts of purchase of the same
plots of land, at identical prices, from the same set of sellers. It thus
seems certain that a fictitious record of the transactions was created in
Persian with the complicity of both Raghunath Das and Jiv Gosa in as well
as the seven headmen of Arith, this having been done probably around
1577-9, the period to which seven of the Persian documents belong. But,
then, the three Braj documents (of 1537-8, 1545, and 1548?) must also
be fictitious since they contain the names of the very same set of sellers!9
    It is, therefore, best to avoid going by the dates of the documents,
and only to accept as plausible the fact that by 1579 Raghunath had


    7 Tarapada Mukheijee and Irfan Habib, ‘Land Rights in the Reign of Akbar:
the Evidence of the Sale-deeds of Vrindaban and Arith’, PIHC, 50th session
(1989-90, Gorakhpur), pp. 237-39 [Chapter 6 in this volume].
    8 Thus, according to a Braj document (Wright 1), Raghunath Das bought a
plot for Rs.30 in vs 1602/ad 1545, while, according to another in Persian, in ah
953/ad 1546, it was JTv Gosa in who was the buyer, in both cases the price (Rs.30)
being the same. The same is the case with the Braj deed of 1548 (?) (Wright 2)
and the Persian deed of ah 985/ad 1577 (MM No. 7, of which No. 11 (&. 18)
in the same collection is another copy), Raghunath being the buyer in the former,
Jiv Gosa’in in the latter, and the price being the same (Rs.20).
    ’ The reference to price paid in rupaiya in the earliest Braj document by its
given date (vs 1595/ad 1537-8) (Wright 1A) plainly proves it to be a forgery,
since the rupee came into use only under Sher Shah (1540-45).
166                        Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 successively bought six plots of untilled land to the east of Arith. The
 total price paid, reinforced by detailed plot prices recorded in Raghunaths
 hibanama (gift-deed) of 1588, was Rs.238, the same total as given in the
 headmens statement of 1579 in respect of all the plots (RD No. II).1011
    From the descriptions of the plots of land transferred we learn
 something about what Raghunath did with the land. He dug the two
ponds, the Radhakund and Krishnakund, within it, both of these being
mentioned in these documents. There was already a nala or drainage
channel, as we have seen; and this brought water ro Radhakund when in
flow, as we learn from later documents (MM No. 4 of ah 1052/ad 1642
and RD 102 of ah 1055/ad 1645). He also dug a well to supply water to
the pond, this being called the ‘pond-well’ (chah-i talah) in MM No. 8,
of ah 985/ad 1577 (cf. also kolab-o-chah (‘pond and well’) mentioned in
Raghunath’s hibanama, ah 996/ad 1588). This pond digging required
space in which the excavated soil was to be piled up in mounds (matt dari
ve ko, mail rarave kau—Wright 1A and 2, of 1537-8 and 1548(?) and Braj
Lals statement, post-1725 (CU)), for which too land had to be acquired.
    How Raghunath Das came by Rs.238 to invest in village wasteland in
Arith, we do not know. In ah 987/ad 1579, the seven headmen of Arith
were made to affirm, quite falsely, that all the money had been received
from Jiv Gosa’in through his agent, the pujari, Gopal Das, son of Radha
Ballabh (RD No. 11). This, as we have suggested, was probably done
to ensure that Jiv Gosa in’s claim over the land was placed legally on a
firmer basis. In ah 996/1588, as if to make assurance double sure, Gosa in
Raghunath Das transferred by way of gift (hiba) all the six plots of land he
had bought at Arith to Jiv Gosa in (VRI, SI. No. 47, Acc. No. 8). By about
this time at least two retreats (kunj), one of Raghunath himself and the
other of Jiv Gosa in, had also been set up near Radhakund (Krishnadas’s
statement, text pub., BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, between pp. 308 & 309,
dated vs 1694/ad 1637). Finally, a small temple of Radhakund came up—
small, because in Akbar’s farmdn of 1598 (Zimn, III, xviii) it was not
thought of as worth more than ten bighas (ilahi) or 2.4 hectares of land in
tax-free grant (NAI-2671-1).11


   10 In the prices for plots as given in deeds for individual transactions, the total
comes to Rs.252, but that is because for one plot there is a discrepancy in the
date of transaction as well as price. MM No. 10 of ah 985/ad 1577 gives a price
of Rs.44 instead of Rs.30 stated for the corresponding Plot No. 2 in Raghunaths
hibanama,
   11 For a translation (with commentary) of this farmdn, see Appendix I
(‘Documents’) to Chapter 3 of this volume.
                            From Arith to Radhakund                               167

   Jiv Gosa’in had by now doubtless attained a dominant position within
the Chaitanya sect in Vrindavan. Through his Sanskrit will of 1606 and
codicil of 1608 he left all his entitlements and effects to his disciple Bilasdas
(Vilasadasa), with instructions that after Bilasdas’s death these were to be
passed on to Krishandas (Krishnadasa).12 This is also put on record by
Krishandas in a bilingual statement, dated ad 1637, he having by now
received all the rights and properties, held by Jiv Gosa’in from Bilasdas,
including the effects of Jiv Gosa in’s uncles, Rup and Sanatan, and of
Raghunath, all of whom had gifted them to Jiv Gosa’in (BSOAS, XLII
(2), Plate III), This document further shows that Krishandas was now
exercising full control over the properties in Arith where he gifted the
house of Raghunath and Jiv Gosa’in to Chaudhuri Kishordas Soti, purohit.
The description of the boundaries of this property shows that the house
had Radhakund (the pond) to its south, and there were around it the kunj
(dwellings) of Radhaballabhjiu and of certain Mathurs (Brahmans from
Mathura?),1314and (a temple of) Biharijiu. Obviously, a settlement around
the ponds had by now been established.
   The Radhakund tank came after some time to face threats from the
extension of village habitation. There was an attempt to grow singharas
(water-chestnuts) in the pond. Here, for the first time, the Mughal
administration entered the picture. An unidentified local official issued
a parwdna in ah 1050/ad 1640-1, addressed to ‘the muqaddams and
bavdla-ddr [officer-in-charge] of village Arith’, directing them to prevent
cultivation of the plant in the pond, since it had been dug ‘by a person for
gaining merit’. The mention of ha vala-ddr, presumably the tax-collector’s
representative in charge of the village, is interesting, his jurisdiction
deriving, perhaps, from the fact that singhara cultivation could yield
revenue to the authorities?4
   In ah 1052/1642, three headmen of the village, Bari Khan, Chand, and
Girdhar, gave an undertaking to Gosa’in Krishandas that they would not
extend tillage around the ndla draining into Radhakund, nor cut any trees
there (MM No. 4), Krishandas also obtained a parwdna in ah 1055/ad


     12 Reproduced and translated by Tarapada Mukherjee and J.C. Wright, ‘An
 Early Testamentary Document in Sanskrit’, BSOAS, vol. XLII (2), pp. 297-320.
     13 It is unlikely that by ‘Mathuran’ here persons of the Banya sept of Mathur
 are meant.
     14 Singhara was, indeed, a high-rated crop. In the dastur-circle of pargana
 Sahar, to which Arith belonged, the A’in-i Akhari, gives the rate of 115 dams, 20
jitals, per bigha as against the rate for wheat, 67 dams, 2 jitals (Abu’l Fazl, A’in-i
Akhari, ed. H. Blochmann, Calcuttta, 1867-77, vol. I, pp. 359-60).
 168                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  1645-6, from an official, addressed to Sukhdev, shiqqddr (tax-collector) of
 pargana Sahar, in which Arith was situated, to ensure that the headmen
  (muqaddams) of the village were prevented from cutting down trees in
  Krishandas’s land and from closing ‘access to the ghat’ apparently meaning
 Radhakund (RD No. 104), This time Bari, Chandrasen, Banwari, etc.,
  muqaddams, gave a pledge to Sukhdev, the shiqqddr, that they would
  not till the land around the nala nor cut trees or their branches on land
 bordering Radhakund (ah 1055/ad 1645: RD No. 102). Aparwana from
  (the jagirddr.'1) Budh Singh, dated 20 ry Shahjahan/AD 1646, was also
 issued to the effect that no one should cut trees on lands in the village
 that had been purchased with money (zar-kharid) by Jiv Gosain (RD No.
  12).15
     The ‘Vrindavan estate’, as we may for convenience call it, was also
 being menaced by the interference of moneyed men from Mathura. Bari,
 Chandrasen, Banwari, Gurusen, Dayal, etc., muqaddams, were enticed
 into selling some land ‘above the Kund and the kunj to Khamanand, a
 Brahman of Mathura, for Rs.20. Later (ah 1051/ad 1641), the headmen
 admitted that this they were not entitled to do, because, as Krishandas
 had shown them, the land had been sold to ‘Gosa’in Rup, Sanatan, and
 Ji Gosa’in by our ancestors’. The sale to Khamanand, therefore, stood
 annulled (RD No. 9). Khamanand was probably the unnamed Brahman
 who had been ‘making use of his money for some time’ to intrude into
 the estate around ‘Shri Radhakund’. Krishandas sought to foil his attempt
 by seeking introduction to a noble (nawwdb-i mustajdb), presumably the
jagirddr, through an intermediary (RD No. 96). This letter, as shown by
 the form of its invocation, cannot be later than the end of Shahjahans
 reign (1658),16
     The threat to the Vrindavan estate in Arith around the pond Radhakund
 seems obviously to have arisen because of the place’s growing sanctity and
 settlement, which invited the attention of the devout and caused land


    15 While by its form a parwana can be easily identified, the designation or
office of the official or noble issuing it is rarely mentioned in the text, only the
seal giving usually the name and titles of the issuer.
    16 The letter is addressed to Mehta Sitaldas, apparently a high subordinate of
the noble concerned. The letter has the invocation Alldhu Akbar, which was
officially replaced by Bismilldh after Shahjahans deposition. The unidentified
writer of the letter goes on to offer ‘Ram, Ram’ as salutation and underlines his
devotion to Jiv Gosa in. For some reason, he wished his letter to be returned after
perusal by Sitaldas, the addressee, to ‘Gosai Krishandas’, the bearer. Did he wish
his intervention in the matter not to become widely known?
                          From Arith to Radhakund                             169

prices to rise. Of this we are made aware by a bilingual document of 32 ry
of Shahjahan/AD 1658 (IVS No. 217). It tells us that one Sltaldas (who,
as the language used in respect of him shows, was a man of some status)
had given Rs.24 to Gusai Murlidhar, son of Gusal Ganga Ram, to buy ‘ten
“pucca” biswas (half a standard bigha) (51 x 39 dir as in seemingly exact
measurement, also given) from three Brahmans, Gobinddas, Gopinath,
and Mohan, while Gopinath had his own kunj adjoining the land sold.
There were two other adjoining kunjs and ‘the Arith road’ ran to their
west. Sltaldas had by now built a kunj on the purchased land.17
    From these transactions, it seems established that the village headmen
(panch or muqaddams) were entitled only to dispose of the wasteland of the
village, and were not entitled to sell it again, even if it remained untilled
in the hands of the purchasers and their successors. As far as the privately
held lands adjacent to houses were concerned, these could be sold away
by the current holders without reference to the headmen. No instance,
however, of a cultivated field being offered for sale is documented in Arith
from the period before the end of Shahjahan’s reign.


                                       Ill

Arith was affected indirectly by a change in the Imperial government with
the deposition of Shahjahan and the accession of Aurangzeb in 1658-9.
In 1568 Jiv Gosain, at the recommendation of Todar Mal, had won for
himself the custodianship of both the Madan Mohan and Govind-dev
temples in Vrindavan ‘as it has been given to him also by Rup Gosa in’,
his uncle (Akbar’s farmdn, ah 976, VRI, Acc. No. 1). Expressly citing
this, Shahjahan had reserved for Jiv Gosa’in’s successor Krishandas the


    17 The document was necessitated by the reason that in the receipt (tamassuk)
from the sellers, Murlidhar had got the name of Ganga Ram entered as the
purchaser, and now he had to make it clear that Sltaldas was the real owner of
‘that land and kunj. Incidentally, half a bigha equalled only 200 square diras, so
the measurements of length and width yielding 1989 square diras are widely off
the mark, for such an area would be equal to nearly 5 bighas.
    The secret purchaser Sltaldas here is unlikely to be the same as Mehta
Sltaldas, apparently an official, to whom Jiv Goswaml’s successor Krishan Das had
carried a letter of recommendation about this time, partly because while that
letter is found very naturally in the R.D. collection, the present statement comes
from IVS, suggesting that Sltaldas, the land purchaser, was connected with the
Gopinath temple’s establishment.
170                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 same offices by a farmdn in his rv 18/ad 1644 (copy in RD No. 133).
 But Mirza Raja Jai Singh of Amber, who had already in 1633 obtained
 from the Emperor the stewardship of the Imperial land grant assigned to
the Govind-dev temple (NAI-2671/4), was apparently dissatisfied with
Krishandas. With his greatly enhanced influence at the court of the new
 emperor, Aurangzeb, he apparently obtained sanction for the removal of
the aged Krishandas, and in March 1659 issued a parwdna accusing the
latter of fraud (sdkht) and transferring the custody of Govind-dev temple
to Seo Ram (Shiv Ram) who belonged to the line of successors of Rup
Gosa’in (parwdna of ah 1069: Govind-dev Coll.).
    This change was bound to affect the authority of Krishandas and his
successors (in the line of Jiv Gosa’in) over the estate of Arith. Krishandas
was succeeded by Chand Kunwar, and he by Braj Kunwar: in 1669 Braj
Kunwar had the village headmen, Chandrasen, Jagannath, Bhikya, Siyaram,
Jairam, Hirdairam, etc., summoned to the presence of the jagirdar to give
a pledge that they would not till the land along the ndla feeding the
Radhakund, nor cut down trees in the ground above the pond. They
mentioned in their pledge that the area was in the vicinity of the kunj of
Braj Kunwar Das Gosa’in (RD No. 57). In 1676 Braj Kunwar, along with
Parmanand, both described as Bairagjs, secured a parwdna from Sayyid
Mubariz Khan, officer (in jdglr) of Prince Mu azzam, forbidding anyone
from interfering with their land and gardens (RD No. 95).
    But towards the end of the century Seo Ram s successors (of the line of
Rup Gosa’in) began to make claims on both the ponds and the adjacent
land. By a parwdna of ah 1112/ad 1700, Kahl Singh Rathor, apparently
an officer of the Amber court, directed that Gobind Charan, the successor
to Krishan Charan, who had succeeded Seo Ram, should take over the
custody of the kunjs of Jint (i.e. Jiv) Gosa’in in Vrindavan as well as Arith,
just as Krishan Charan had done (NAI-2671/16). In the hibandma of ah
 1121/ad 1710, by which Gobind Charan transferred all his possessions
and properties to his cousin and designated successor, Jagannath, he listed
among the assets transferred at Arith both the ponds Radhakund and
Krishankund, and the kunjs of Gobindrai (i.e. dwelling of [custodian of?]
Govind-dev temple), Radhakrishan Chakravarti, and Gobind Charan
himself, together with the adjacent wasteland (Govind-dev Coll.).
    This assumption of control over both the ponds was supported by a
new 'invention of tradition’, first recorded among extant documents in
vs 1770/ad 1713. Raghunathdas had, it was now averred, indeed made
the initial acquisitions of land and discovered or created the two ponds,
but he had transferred these to Haridas (not, that is, to Jiv Gosa’in), as
                          From Arith to Radhakund                            171

the custodian (adhikdri) of the Govind-dev temple. Henceforth all the
rights over these properties belonged to the custodian of that temple, the
current incumbent being Jagannath. On that basis, Jagannath could claim
to control all access to Radhakund and to the Vaishnav assemblies (samdj)
for katha-kirtan there. (This declaration was made in March 1713 by all
the zamindars and muqaddams (jamldar-mokadaman) of Arith, four of
whom are named (declaration in Braj: Wright No. 17)). This was repeated
in a bilingual document of vs 1773/ad 1716 (NAI-2671/21).
    The occasion for such assertion was apparently not any challenge
from the line of Jiv Gosa’in, that was at this time torn by a succession
dispute after the death of Braj Kunwar in or before 1700, but from
another important faction of the Chaitanya sect. This group included
Ramchand Ghosh Thakur, Svami Mohandas, Rup Kaviraj, Gobindpriya,
Krishnapriya, Bisvanath Chakarbarti, Manohar Ray, and Anantram, who
had all been expelled, apparently at Jagannath’s orders, but had then been
readmitted to Radhakund, according to the headmens declaration of 1713
(Wright 17). However, by their declaration of 1716, where they recorded
their allegiance to Jagannath once again, the headmen acknowledged
that the same eight persons (including the two women, Gobindpriya and
Krishnapriya) would again be excluded from Radha-kund (NAI-267/21).
The reason for this may well be that Mohandas, the second in the excluded
group, was practically a rival to Jagannath among the Chaitanya mendicants
at Vrindavan: in 1718, when there was some suspicion of maldistribution
in the disposal of alms, the Mughal official Mahyar Khan chose Brajanand
(kinsman and close confidant of Jagannath) and Mohandas to supervise
their distribution among the Gaudiya sect (Mahyar Khan’s parwana,
RY 7 of Farrukhsiyar, collection unspecified).18 Clearly, there must have
been some anxiety that, possessing such high status, Mohandas and his
associates might establish themselves at Arith as well, to the detriment of
Jagannath’s authority there.
   Once Gopi Raman, ofJiv Gosa’ins line, was able to establish his position
as the successor of Braj Kunwar, especially after the death by 1718 of his
rival claimant, Gopinath, he too began to take interest in the property at
Arith. He drew officials’ attention to the fact that one of his ‘ancestors’
(buzargdn) had ‘purchased land within the limits of village Arith, known
as Radhakund, and established a pond and gardens there’ (parwdnas

  18 For references to these and other persons of the Chaitanya sect, the reader
may consult Irfan Habib, ‘A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins of the
Chaitanya Sect at Vrindavan’, in: Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, op. cit., pp.
131-59 (Chapter 10 in this volume).
172                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

issued in ry 2 of Muhammad Shah, ad 1720: RD Nos. 27 and 47; MM,
unnumbered: 3 parwanas). Possibly some arrangement had been made
with Jagannath over the two ponds and land attached to them, for Gopi
Ramans complaint was now directed not against Jagannath, but against
Nathu Ram, a Brahman, resident of Mathura, who having seized some plot
within the land inherited by Gopi Raman, wished to set up a compound
 (ahata) there. The parwanas show that Gopi Raman’s complaints were
upheld by the officials (see besides the parwanas cited earlier, the parwanas
of the same year, RD Nos. 213 and 40).19 Apparently, Nathu Ram was
a person of some influence, for a letter survives written to him by an
unnamed official pointing out that Gopi Raman had complained bitterly
to Raja Muhkam Singh, an influential noble, on whose recommendation
orders restraining Nathu Ram had been sent to the headmen and to Nathu
Ram himself. The latter was, therefore, requested to suspend the building
of his kunj until the dispute was settled (RD No. 184).
    The incursions on the land around the sacred tanks however, continued.
Gopi Ramans son and successor Braj Lal, in a Persian statement for public
endorsement, undated but presumably some time after 1725, complained
that three Brahmans (named) had forcibly seized land to the south-west
of Radhakund, which contained mounds of earth dug out when the kund
was excavated, and were now bent on selling it. Braj Lal intended to take
his complaint, when endorsed by a number of leading citizens (panchari)
of Arith, to Sri Maharaja Dhiraj (Savai Jai Singh of Amber) (CU).
    Quite obviously, by this time, and perhaps much earlier, there was
no village wasteland left for the village headmen to sell. So newcomers,
attracted by the villages increasing sanctity, needed either to covet parts
of the wasteland under the control of the Vrindavan divines, especially
such as what lay near the sacred tanks, or purchase land at increasingly
high prices from other owners. In 1667 four villagers, Ghasi, son of
Jaimal, and Khandi, Hirdai, and Ghasi, sons of Jagdev, sold 300 square
diras or 15 biswas of land to Gosa’ins Manikanth and Kamal Nain for as
much as Rs.30. We learn from an additional note in the document that
an equivalent area of land was sold to the two Gosa ins subsequently for a
larger sum (Rs. 37) and that the two purchasers were priests of the devala
Radhakrishan (Bilingual: IVS 190). Thus a new temple of this name had
now been built. In 1710 Kishan Rai, the grandson of Gosain Gopinath,
sold a kunj with 'surrounding walls of brick and mud, and partly roofed
with wood’, situated within two plots of land, the total area being 1244

   19 It is interesting that one of these parwanas to restrain Nathu Ram is issued
by Churaman, the Jat chief, then in Mughal service (RD No. 47).
                         From Arith to Radhakund                          173

square dir a, or just over 3 bighas, 2 biswas, for Rs.60 to Gosa’in Radha
Mohan.
    Jagannath, the custodian of Govind-dev temple, had not apparently
been satisfied with the land he already controlled at Arith. Two interesting
purchases of his are recorded. In ah 1129/1717 he purchased from two
Gauruas Har Rai and Ranjit, with different parents, a ‘garden’ known by
the name Ghasi Ram, comprising 5400 square dir as (13 bighas, 10 biswas)
for the large sum of Rs.250. How the settlement had grown with varied
occupants is shown by the fact that the garden bordered (E) the land of
one Narayan Soja; (W) the wall of the kunj of Lahori Misr, Brahman; (S)
the land ofMathura, shoemaker; and (N) the public road (NAI-2691/11).
In 1728, Jagannath purchased a plot of land (area not mentioned) from
two Chamars, Khunya and Goyasya, for Rs.51. The Chamars’ plot largely
bordered open land: (W) Ballabh Seths garden; (N) the,garden of Govind-
dev temple; (E) Sadarams dressed field (kyari); and (S.) Ballabh Naina’s
barn (kothawdri) and vegetable garden (Wright 23). Clearly, the Chamars’
holding, surrounded by cultivation, was situated considerably away from
the main settlement.
    Religious sentiment could also make one part with ones land. In 1722,
eight zamindars of four families joined together to gift in pun-arth four
bighas of land to Gosa’in Subal Das, adhikdri of the Madan Mohan temple
of Vrindavan. The land bordered dressed plots on two sides and one kunj
each on the two other sides, the kunj of Manu Joshi and that of Daya Ram
 Sahu (MM No. 82). Apparently, an astrologer (joshi) and a moneylender
 (sdhu) had also now come to live (and do business?) in Arith.


                                     IV

We have seen how the settlement at Arith was expanding in area, mainly
because of its increasing attraction as a Vaishnav pilgrim or religious centre,
with its holy tanks and temples. Along with the priests and pilgrims came
shoemakers, astrologers and moneylenders, to cater to the needs of both
the permanent and floating populations—and so their chance mention
in our documents. Money too came in as land prices rose, to meet the
demand from persons with means coming from outside and wishing to set
up kunjs or dwellings, and even temples.
   Such circumstances were bound to alter the conditions of the original
peasant community. In our sixteenth-century documents we find at
Arith seven headmen perhaps representing seven peasant families of the
174                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 village with little indication of differentiation. But in 1713 and 1716, the
 differentiation is plainly recognized in the formula ‘V, X, Y, Z, and all
 small and big zamindars and muqaddams of village Arith’ (Wright 17; and
 the Braj version of the headmens declaration of 1716 in NAI-2671/21).
 In the Arith documents the term zamindar (jamidar in Braj) now appears
 for the first time, but in a clearly devalued sense of large land-holding
 peasants.
     How this development took place step by step cannot be traced. The
 external influences which now penetrated the village were not wholly
 Vaishnav. Islam came too, and when in 1641 we first meet the headmen
 of the village after Raghunaths time, five are named and the first of
 them is Bari (Khan), the others Chandrasen, Banwari, Guru Sen, Dayal,
 etc. (RD No. 9); in 1642, we have Bari Khan, Chandarsen, and Girdhar
 (bilingual, MM No. 4); and in 1645, Bari, Chandrasen, Banwari, etc. (RD
 No. 102). There is no need to assume that Bari Khan was an outsider;
 he was presumably a convert and retained his position in the Gaurua
 caste. In 1717 we have ‘All Khan, who is mentioned as the father of Go lai
 and grandfather of Har Rai, who himself, along with Jagannath, son of
Jairam, is said to be of the Gaurua Jadon caste (qaum) (NAI-2691/11).
Thus ‘Ali Khan, as the grandfather of one of the two sellers, despite his
 conversion, had remained a recognized member of the Gaurua caste. In
 1722, among the eight 'zamindars’ making the gift in pun-arth (pun-arth,
donated property) of 4 bighas of land, already mentioned, were ‘All Khan’s
son, Golals two sons, Har Rai and Raja Ram, who did so, unmindful of
the faith of their grandfather and, perhaps, father (MM No. 82).
    When in 1669 we have another list of headmen, Bari Khan had probably
died, for Chandarsen now headed the list with Jagannath, Bhikya, Siyaram,
Jairam, Hirdairam, etc., as his colleagues. They were directed by a local
official to refrain from tilling the ground and cutting down trees in the
land around Radhakund (RD No. 57). Since the names of the fathers of
the persons forming the group of headmen are not given, the connection
with the earlier set of muqaddams headed by Bari Khan cannot be traced
except for the continued presence of Chandarsen.
    Two documents of 1713 and 1716 (Wright 17 and NAI-2691/11) are
most valuable in this respect, since they provide greater details about the
individuals composing the set of headmen, though the muqaddams named
are only four. Combining the Braj texts of 1713 and 1716 and the Persian
version of the 1716 text, we obtain the following particulars about the
four men:
                           From Arith to Radhakund                              175

1.   Raja Ram, son of Hridai, of the firqa/thok Trabhangi
2.   Chaju, son of Dayal, of the firqa/thok Das
3.   Pita, son of Gopi, of the firqa/thok Gale/Gali
4.   Ranjlta, son ofJagannath, of the firqa/thok Sanvle

    The word firqa in the Persian version (1716 text) means clan, group,
sect, and here it may mean a set of families with a common ancestor. This
would be supported by the fact that Ranjltas father Jagannath is shown
by a sale-deed of 1667 (IVS-190) to have been the grandson of Sanvle,
by whom his firqa is here designated. Similarly, Gale/Gula was the father
of Maj ha, who appears on the lists of the muqaddams or panch who sold
land to Raghunath Gosa’in in Akbar’s time. Trabhangi and Das could thus
also have been headmen in some earlier generations. While the main text
of the Braj document of 1713 does not use any designation for Trabhangi,
etc., in the ‘signatures’ each headman is identified by his bos (e.g. ‘Ranjit,
Sarnie [Sanvle] ko bas me). Wright, apparently taking the term as a
variant of the word vas, derived it from Sanskrit vansa, and so meaning
‘descendant’.2021Finally, thok, used in lieu offirqa in the 1716 Braj version,
means a body of persons or community, and so can also stand for a group
of families descended from the same ancestor. Now since such groups,
under the so-called bhaiyachara or community arrangements, divided
village lands among themselves, thok also came to mean a subdivision of
the village land, corresponding to pattiF
    It would thus seem that four of these sets of families had by now
become preponderant in the village and possibly carved out large shares of
land for themselves, while there were, as the Braj versions expressly state,
yet other ‘small and big zamindars and muqaddams as well, to whom
must have been left the remainder of the land. A sale-deed of 1717 (NAI-
2691/11) may illustrate how different families shared land lying within the
same portion or thok. Ranjit, son of Jagannath and grandson of Jairam, as
we have seen, was one of the four headmen. Here he sells land (the ‘Ghasi
Ram’ bagh or garden), 5400 square dir'a (13 bighas, 10 biswas) in area,
in concert with Har Rai, the grandson of ‘All Khan, both sellers being
described as Gaurua of the Jadon sept. But there are complexities here.

    20 As has been noted in the introduction to this volume, I was most kindly
given his decipherments and provisional translations of these documents by
Professor J.C. Wright; and from these I have naturally benefited greatly.
    21 Elliot, Memoirs, etc., vol. II, p. 23. For the occurrence of the word thok in
village names in the Mathura District, see F.S. Growse, Mathura-, a District
Memoir (1882), reprint, Delhi, 1979, p. 340.
176                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

In 1722 the same Har Rai was to join with Pitambar, son of Gopinath,
surely identical with Pita, son of Gopi of the thok Gale/Gali, and other
‘zamindars1 in gifting land to Gosa’in Subaldas (MM No. 82). Thus the
‘All Khan family had shares in different fields within the thoks of both
Sanwle and Gale.
    The pair of documents of 1713 and 1716 possess yet another element of
importance. The headmen here, as in no other earlier document, declare
their absolute subservience to the custodian of the Govind-dev temple in
all matters relating to access (shud-amad) to Radhakund. Clearly, they
realized what benefits were accruing to them from the growing sanctity
and repute of the pond that drew the Vaishnavite priests and pilgrims to
their village. The gradual change in the village name was another index
of the mounting dominance of Radhakund in their lives. In the extant
original documents (as against copies of the originals made later in the
eighteenth century), the headmen usually described themselves as those
of village Arith, but even in a document as early as 1579 (RD No. 11)
the name of Arith is followed by the words ‘also known as Radhakund.’
While in 1669 the muqaddams still called their village simply Arith (RD
 No. 57), in a parwdna issued in 1676 by Mubariz Khan the village is just
called Radhakund, without mention of Arith (RD No. 95). However,
even in their declarations of allegiance to the Chaitanya sect of 1713 and
 1716 (Wright 17 and NAI-2671/21) the headmen still use the name Arith
 alone, meaning the replacement of the name Arith by Radhakund, though
by now advanced, was still in process until the 1720 s when our documents
on Arith come to a close.22
    The study of the history of Arith is of much interest in showing
that Mughal-period villages were by no means immune to change. So
far as we can judge from our documents, money relations prevailed and
even wasteland was not without its price. A village was by no means an
 isolated republic, for outsiders could, especially by use of money, establish
themselves within it. Nor was it immune from the authority of the
 state, whose officials could intervene and compel headmen to carry out
 their wishes. Enforcement of property rights by the administration was
 generally expected; otherwise one cannot explain the care bestowed on
 the documenting of private transactions in Persian, obviously for use as



   22 By the late 19th century a legend seems to have been invoked to link the
name Arith to the Krishna lore: here Lord Krishna had supposedly killed the
bull Arishtha, and ‘the two famous tanks [were] prepared for Krishna’s expiatory
ablution (Growse, op. cit., pp.82-83).
                        From Arith to Radhakund                        177

evidence of property ownership, to be submitted when required before
authorities outside the village.
   True enough, our documents shed little or no light on other crucial
aspects of agrarian life such as the land tax, rent, and wages. Apparently,
the gosa’ins paid no tax on the ponds or the wastelands, or kunjs in their
possession, and so their documents have nothing to tell us on that score.
For peasants and artisans conditions of life must have been difficult;
but quite naturally their own voice hardly ever comes to us through the
Vrindavan records, important and even unique as they still are.


Addendum

On a fresh reading of the documents an interesting fact came to light.
In the acknowledgement of the purchase of land on behalf of Sitaldas
that Murlidhar, son of Gahgaram, recorded in 1658 (in both Persian and
Braj), while defining the boundaries of the land, the kunj of Nara in Bhatt
(so spelt in Nagari; ‘Narayan Bath’ is the form in Persian) is mentioned
as bordering the plot on the north (IVS-217), Is it possible that we have
here a reference to Narayan Bhatt, the author of Vraja-bhakti-vildsa,
who ‘describes himself as living at Sri-kund, i.e., Radhakund’ (Growse,
Mathura: a District Memoir, p. 89)? The date assigned to him by Growse,
viz., ad 1553, is, of course, far too early, for by that time Radhakund had
hardly been dug. As we have seen, all the extant documents from Arith/
Radhakund, bearing dates prior to 1560, are patently fictitious, and some
later ones, perhaps, as well. So, the Narayan Bhatt of our document could
well have been the author of Vraj-bhakti-vildsa after all.
                             CHAPTER 9



      Land Holdings and Land-Control
             in Village Rajpur
                                Irfan Habib




The Survey of India’s Guide Map of Mathura and Vrindavan, 1989 (scale,
 1:20,000), shows the village of Rajpur (27°34’ N., 77°42’E.)as situated
on the southern outskirts of the expanding township ofVrindavan. From
the Madan Mohan temple, with which Rajpur came to have a special
connection, and which stands on the north-western edge of Vrindavan,
the map shows the village to be at a distance of 1.7 kilometres in a straight
line.
    The earliest extant original document known to us in which the name
of the village Rajpur appears is Raja Todar Mais parwana of Rabf II 992
(12 April-10 May 1584).1 Here not only does the name of the village as
Rajpur occur, but its older name Belu is also mentioned. Since this is an
order issued by Todar Mai to his own official, Udai Chand, about the
assignment in charity (khairdt) of 100 bighas of‘self-cultivated, tilled land
(mazru-khwud-kashtay to Gopaldas, sevak of the Madan Mohan temple,
it is clear that Todar Mai must have then held in his jagir the village of
Rajpur, presumably along with Mathura. That Todar Mai paid special
attention to this village is also shown by the fact that he laid out a garden


    1 RK No. 154. This parwana is also of some interest for its seal, reading:    .
Todar Mai, banda-i dargah, Ram kl pandh (‘Todar Mai, Slave of the (Imperial)
Court, under Protection of Ram’), the last three words forming a Hindi phrase,   .
though pandh is a Persian word. The same legend is found in Todar Mai’s seal      ■
affixed on the back of a farman of Akbar, issued in 1575, for consolidating      ;
madad-i ma‘dsh grants in pargana Malihabad, sarkdr Lakhnau (transcript in        )
Library of Department of History, AMU).
             Land Holdings and Land-Control in Village Rdjpiir                      179

 here, which is mentioned in a chaknama of ah 1103/ad 1692 as bordering
 two plots belonging to the area of the same grant.23It is possible, then,
 that the name of Rajpur to replace the older one, ‘Belu, was given to the
 village by Raja Todar Mai himself, the first syllable of the name recalling
 the title raja which he had received early in Akbar’s reign. This change of
 name could have happened well before 1584, since he had held the area
 in his jogfr earlier as well, as one may judge from the reference to him as
 a sponsor of Jiv Gosain at Vrindavan, in Akbar’s farmdn of October 1568
 (VRI, Acc. No. 1). The title of raja is already attached to his name in that
farmdn? The direction in the parwdna that the cultivated area (mazrtV)
within Gopaldas’s khwud-kashta (self-cultivated land) should be measured
 and marked out (chak-basta) suggests that Gopaldas had acquired enough
 land, cultivated by or under him (and so paying revenue), to enable nearly
 21.50 hectares of such land being brought under the grant, and so made
 exempt from the revenue hitherto levied on it.4
     Another grant of 100 bighas (ultimately measuring 76 bighas, 2 biswas
 ilahi, or 18.26 hectares) already existed within the village. This, as we
 learn from references to it in two later documents, of 1719 and 1722,5 was
 created by an imperial farmdn of ah 976 (ad 1568-9). The zimn of the
 document of 1722 makes it clear, however, that this grant was hitherto
 entirely in untaxed cultivable wasteland (zamin-i banjar khdrij-i jamaj.
 In other words, the grantee, Madho, priest of the Gopinath temple,
 Vrindavan, was expected to settle peasants here or otherwise arrange for



    2 RK No. 158.
    3 While discussing the etymology of place names in the Mathura District,
F.S. Growse, Mathura: a District Memoir, 1882, reprint, New Delhi, 1978, p. 326,
cites a local tradition that the name Rajpur was given to the village by a Brahman
from Kaman in the sixteenth century ‘with reference to the Raj-ghat’. This seems
a late invention. The fact that the village received its name Rajpur in the sixteenth
century is confirmed by Todar Mais parwanas reference to the villages earlier
name, Belu (no longer apparently remembered in tradition), for which Rajpur
was now being substituted.
    4 The bighas and biswas have been converted into modern measures by us on
the basis of lengths and areas of the Mughal units worked out in Irfan Habib,
The Agrarian System of Mughal India, 3rd ed., New Delhi, 1999, pp. 406—19.
Since the gaz-i ilahi was introduced in 1586-7 (ibid., p. 250), the present grant
was made in terms of a bigha based on the previous standard gaz. As we shall see
in what follows, 100 bighas of this measure were adjudged to be equal to 89 bighas,
9 biswas of the ilahi scale; it is the latter area that we have converted into hectares.
    5 IVS, Nos. 159 and 191-192.
180                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

cultivation of the area granted, while enjoying the privilege of having to
pay no land tax on it.
   The village saw yet another grant made out of the land situated within it.
In 1598, an imperial farmdn confirmed 500 bighas already given to priests
of the temples in Mathura and Vrindavan and their vicinity, and made an
additional grant to the temples of another 500 bighas. Of the latter, 85
bighas ilahi (20.40 hectares) lying within village Rajpur were granted to the
Madan Mohan temple, besides 35 bighas in Vrindavan granted to the same
temple.6 Land under these grants was to be demarcated half in cultivated
land (and so hitherto revenue-paying) and half in uncultivated land under
the Rule of‘Half’ (bid-munasifa).
   So far as we know, then, by 1600, over 60 hectares of the land within
the village precincts had been made tax-free for the Madan Mohan temple
and its custodians and for another family of priests connected with the
Gopinath temple of Vrindavan. Of these grants, the one created by Todar
Mais orders of 1584 has generated the most documents judging from
what has survived; and two of these, being chakndmas, of 1626 and 1692,
yield some valuable information about the village and its inhabitants as
well.
   Todar Mai’s parwdna, setting aside 100 bighas (before introduction of
the gaz-i ilahi) in grant for the benefit of ‘Gopaldas, sevak of the Madan
Mohan temple’, had no imperial sanction behind it, and it could have
been revoked by any of the jagirdars succeeding him. This did not
apparently happen; but after Gopaldass death, his successor at the temple
as its (chief?) sevak, Srichand, took steps to get the grant converted into
an imperial one, and have himself recorded as the grantee. His efforts
resulted in Jahangirs farmdn of 14 Aban ry 8 (6 November 1613) by
which the land of the grant, computed as equal to 89 bighas, 9 biswas upon
conversion of the old bigha into bigha-i ilahi, became a normal imperial
madad-i ma'dsb grant. By this farmdn the land had to be measured and
demarcated (paimuda wa chak-basta).7 The initial demarcation document



   6 Akbar’s farmdn of 43 Yr Ilahi (1598), original version, in National Archives
of India, NAI-2671 (1); a copy exists in the Govind-dev collection. For the
additional grant of 170 bighas made to the Madan Mohan temple and two other
temples, a consequential separate farmdn was issued at the same time, a copy of
which survives in MM No. 2. The grant of 85 bighas to the Madan Mohan temple
in vill. Rajpur is duly recorded in both farmans.
   7 The original of the farmdn has survived (RK No. 143A). A copy certified
by a qdzi is to be found in MM, I, No. 117. RK No. 166, is another copy.
            Land Holdings and Land-Control in Village Rajpur              181

 (chaknama) has not survived, having been allegedly lost during the Jat
 insurgency (see below).
     For some reason, Srichand, the grantee, subsequently sought to have the
 area of part of his grant re-demarcated, so as, presumably, to get included
 in it a more productive area from his other khwud-kashta land in order
 to gain more from the grants land-tax exemption. (We should remember
 that in this case, the grant-land, from the beginning, lay entirely in his
predecessors khwud-kdshta holding). In 1626 a chaknama or demarcation
document was prepared, which brought new land of an area of 12 bighas
 18 biswas under the grant, while excluding from it a plot of equal area
 hitherto deemed part of the grant (‘iwaz-i zamln-i chak-i Madan Mohan
jiujj The land so added comprised three plots, bordered, on the east, by
 lands belonging to Madan Mohan and Gopinath temples, on the north,
by the land of the Madan Mohan temple alone, and, in the south, again,
 by land of the Madan Mohan temple plus ‘a tree’. The Madan Mohan
 temple land here probably belonged to the grant of 85 bighas conferred on
 it by Akbar in 1598.
     An interesting entry is the one relating to the western limit of the
 demarcated plots: ‘Land ofthe village ofRajpur, cultivators (karinda): Gadai
 (or Kadai) and Mohan, residents of Dosaich.’ Here we are introduced to
 the category of village-land, which, if untilled or waste, could be disposed
 of by the village headmen. One way of dealing with it was to lease it out
 to paikdsht peasants, i.e. peasants from outside the village.8  9 Gadai and
 Mohan, being residents of a different village, Dosaich (whose site is now
 represented by the mohalla of Dusayat in the town of Vrindavan), had
 only the status of karindas (tillers), and not hereditary peasants. Three
 headmen of the village ofRajpur are named in the document, viz., Bihari,
 Harbans, and Baltok (?), whose consent (qubuliyat) to the demarcation is
duly recorded.
     In 1632, after the death of Srichand, the entire grant of 89 bighas, 9
 biswas, was confirmed by Shahjahan in favour of his ‘heir’, Gosa’indas,
 through a formal^zrman, with the stipulation that the former entitlements
would continue, so that presumably no fresh demarcation (chafe) was called
for.10 From the reign of Shahjahan a set of documents relating to the grant
have survived, issued by officials and jagirdars. The last (of 1657) from

   8 RK No. 160. The document is dated 19 Rajab 1035 (16 April 1626). At that
time the area was in the jagir of Qasim Khan.
   9 Cf. Irfan Habib, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, 3rd ed., pp. 131-32
&     151.
   10 RK No. 173 (original) and MM No. 59 (copy).
182                      Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

that reign is a parwdna from Daud Khan and two other officials of Prince
Dara Shukoh, who then held the area in jdgir.u
   The curtain falls over the grant for much of the reign of Aurangzeb
(1659-1707), no document relating to it having survived from the first
three decades of his reign. But in 1691, a local official acknowledged
the continued existence of the grant, referring to a parwdna of the local
sadr (officer in charge of grants), where the farmdn of Shahjahan which
confirmed the grant had been cited.11  12 It is possible that the necessity of
such acknowledgement arose because of the Jat insurgency, which had
caused much disturbance in the area.
   Gosaindas, the grant-holder, who apparently lived for a long time,
represented to the amin (revenue-assessment officer) of the pargana of
Mathura that he had lost the original chakndma of the grant, among effects
plundered during ‘the disturbances of the accursed Jat’; thereupon the
amin undertook a fresh demarcation. The document recording it (dated
2 April 1692) has fortunately survived.13 This chakndma (bilingual) fixes
the boundaries of seven plots, all treated as rectangles, with the length
and width multiplied to yield the area. The total area of the plots amounts
to 89 bighas, 10 biswas (as against the official grant area of 89 bighas, 9
biswas). None of the plots correspond to any of the three plots, with a
total area of 12 bighas, 18 biswas, that had been demarcated in 1626, so
that the area under the grant must have had its actual limits considerably
altered in the meantime. It is possible to see that the six plots, Nos. 1 to 6,
were in proximity to each other. Plots Nos. 1 and 3 adjoined Todar Mai’s
garden; Nos. 2 and 3 had on part of their borders the field of Raghunath
Brahman; Nos. 2 and 5 shared boundaries with Lalita Bagh; Nos. 5 and
6 both had the field of Gadai, headman, to their west; and Nos. 2 and 6
were contiguous. The ‘road’ (rah) ran to the east and south of Plot No. 4
(the smallest plot of all, measuring only 11 biswas) and to the west of Plots
1 and 2. Plot 7 was totally separated from the rest, and we will presently
touch on its significance.



   11 RK No. 170.
   12 MM No. 45, dated 25 Muharram, 35 ry Aurangzeb (18 October 1691).
   13 RK No. 158, dated 15 Rajab 1103. This is a bilingual document, with the
Persian text followed by a fairly full Braj version with Nagari endorsements in the
margin, one from ‘Anirai and Dearam (so spelt), mukaddams of Rajpur’. The
name of Anirai occurs in the Persian version, where it is stated that the
demarcation had been carried out with ‘the knowledge (wuqufi of Anirai, etc.,
muqaddams of village Raj pur.
            Land Holdings and Land-Control in Village Rajpur                 183

    Coming back to the details of the chaknama, it has much more to tell
us about land use and land holdings than the earlier chaknama, dealing
with a much more concentrated area. In describing the boundaries, the
document twice defines plot boundaries by references to the Bagh of
Todar Mai and the Lalita Bagh, as we have just seen. Bagh (bag in Nagari
text) has a broad meaning, covering both flower garden and orchard. It is,
however, unlikely that Raja Todar Mai had laid out a mere orchard to bear
his name; though Lalita Bagh could well have been an orchard. There
were pathways (raty broad enough to set boundaries for the sides of four
of the six plots. The remaining part of the land bordering the grant-area
comprised cultivated fields (kisht), except for two kyaris or prepared beds,
of which one belonged to the grantee, Gosa indas, himself. One piece of
land, possibly untilled, is described simply as ‘land of village Rajpur’.
    The fields bordering Plots 1 to 6 are identified by the names of their
occupants or holders, who number eight in all. As many as three of them
are carefully described as muqaddams (makadam in Nagari) of vill. Rajpur,
one of whom (Kadai or Gadai, who, to judge by the latter form of the
name, could be a Muslim) holds two fields. Raghunath, resident of Rajpur,
was a Brahman and held two fields. Of the remaining four landholders,
three are described as residents of Rajpur and the fourth of Nagla Nagu, a
hamlet that was considered to be situated within Vrindavan.
    The particulars of the seventh plot provided in the chaknama set it
apart from all the other six plots of the grant. First of all, it is placed in
the khadar, the riverine flood-land (here, at Rajpur, to the south-west
of the village at some distance). The khadar is distinguished from the
 upland’ or Bangar, the land beyond the range of river flooding. While the
Khadar may sustain rice cultivation here and there, the floods to which it
is subject at many places tend to remove the alluvium and deposit sand in
its place. It is home, therefore, to scanty and shifting cultivation, while it
does provide grazing for large herds of cattle.14 The latter might have been
the reason why Gosaindas let nearly 10 per cent of the area of his grant be
placed in the khadar.
    His khadar plot had, on its eastern side, the field of one Ganga Ram,
resident of Rajpur. On the west, it had ‘the field(s) of ‘Kunbiwara’. Kunbis
(also called Kurmis) are peasants specializing in intensive agriculture,
especially tending vegetable gardens. The phrase 'kisht of Kunbiwara’
could, therefore, refer to a Kunbi settlement, along with vegetable plots

   14 W. Crooke in The North-Western Provinces of India, London, 1897,
pp. 24-6, provides an interesting description of the ‘khadir tracts in the region
we are concerned with.
184                       Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

cultivated by its members.15 To the north lay ‘the kisht of Chamars (khet
Chamdran in the Braj version) of the village Rajpur’. One infers that
this was land assigned to the Chamars (lit. tanners), for meeting their
subsistence needs while they carried out the lowly work required of them
by the village or the village headmen.16 It will be seen that while land
holders are generally identified by their individual names, no need is felt
for such refinement in the case of Kunbis and Chamars. Either they were
deemed too lowly to be recalled by their names, or they were so numerous
with their small plots that there was not enough space to put in their
names.
   To the south of the Khadar plot lay ‘the kisht of Rahar.’ Rahar cannot
be an individual because in the cases of all the individual owners, the
chaknama mentions the place of residence, which it does not do here. The
Nagari version has "khet Rahar, which confirms the word as read in the
Persian text. It is probable, then, that it too is a caste name and stands for
the Rahwari caste, whose members were quite numerous in the district of
Mathura, to go by the census of 1891, The Rahwaris traditionally tended
camels; and it is probable that they too were allowed use of land in the
khadar to cultivate it for their subsistence.17
   As we have seen, besides the grant originally conferred on the chief
priest of the Madan Mohan temple by Todar Mai,18 the same temple

   15 For the Kunbis, Kurmis, see W. Crooke, The Tribes and Castes of the North-
Western Provinces and Oudh, Calcutta, 1896, reprint, Delhi, 2005, vol. Ill,
pp. 346-58.
   16 Crooke, Tribes and Castes, vol. II, pp. 169-94, offers a description of the
caste, valid, let us remember, for the late nineteenth century. On pp. 190-1,
Crooke describes the traditional vocations of the Chamars, and, on p. 169, he
quotes the following statement from Mesfield:
Originally, he [the Chamarj seems to have been an impressed labourer (began) who
was made to hold the plough for his master, and received in return space to build his
mud hut near the village, a fixed allowance of grain for every working day, the free
use of wood and grass on the village lands, and the skins and bodies of the animals
that died.
   One means of paying the Chamars for the labour and services forced on them
was to let them cultivate small plots for their own subsistence, as we apparently
find to have been the case at Rajpur. See also Chapter 8 for Chamars and their
land-holding in Arith.
   17 For Rahwaris, see Crooke, Tribes and Castes, vol. IV, pp. 200-02. For the
number of Rahwaris in the Mathura district, see ibid., p. 202.
   18 This grant continued to generate confirmatory documents subsequent to
the chaknama of 1692, viz., Ftiqad Khans parwana of 1697 (MM No. 63);
            Land Holdings and Land-Control in Village Rajpilr               185

received a grant of 85 bighas in the village of Raj pur by Akbar s farmdn of
 1598. It was confirmed by a parwdna of Asaf Khan in 1633 and by Khalil
Khan in 1651,19 Thereafter the extant documents appear to be silent over
this grant. But in 1732, when Sawai Jai Singh, in whose jdgir the parganas
of Mathura and Sahar now lay, issued an order detailing, village-wise, the
grants held by the adhikaris of the Madan Mohan temple, a total of 174
bighas, 9 biswas, was recorded under the village Rajpur.20 This could only
be made up of 89 bighas, 9 biswas, held under the grant going back to
Todar Mai, and 85 bighas granted by Akbar in 1598, both grants together
yielding, in area, a total of 174 bighas, 9 biswas.
    A parwdna of 5 July 1723 which Raja Gujar Mai, the then jagirdar of
Mathura, issued to revenue officials in charge of village Rajpur survives
in a copy. It refers to this very estate of 174 bighas 9 biswas held in that
village by the Madan Mohan temple by way of madad-i ma‘ash. This
parwdna was obviously issued in the interest of Gusa in Subal Das and
other adhikaris of the temple, since it enjoins the local officials ‘to require
the zamindars to pay the tax (mahsul) on that land to the temple adhikaris’
(Vrindavan Docs., 145). Clearly, this exhortation envisages a situation
where the lands under the madad-i madsh grants were not cultivated
through labourers or even through small rent-paying peasants, but by
substantive tenant-farmers (zamindars), who were expected to pay to the
temple establishment what they would have been obliged to pay to the
government by way of ordinary land-tax had they been cultivating non­
grant land. This is also suggestive of the kinds of arrangements that were
made by holders of substantive areas of grant to get income out of their
estates.
    Besides the grant-lands held by the establishment of the Madan
Mohan temple, there was the early grant received by the priest of the
Gopinath temple of Vrindavan from Emperor Akbar as early as 1568-69,
its area subsequently adjusted to 76 bighas, 2 biswas, in the ilahi scale,
equal to 18.26 hectares. This was confirmed by imperial officials in 1719
and 1722;21 and the land in question therefore, must have remained in


Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna of 1703 (MM No. 46); Fazllat Khans parwdna of
1707/1711 (MM 50A-B); Chhabela Rams parwdna of 1713 (RK unnumbered,
dated 24 Jumada I ry 2); and Shamsu’ddin Husain’s parwdna of 1717 (MM No.
103). In the 1720s Gosain Subaldas wrote a letter to ‘Inayatullah Khan, possibly
the then jagirdar of the area, seeking a verification of the grant (CU).
   19 MM no. 118, dated 20 Di ry 5; and MM No. 62, dated 27 Jumada ry 24,
   20 MM No. 76A-B, dated 24 Shawwal ry 14.
   21 IVS Nos. 159 and 191-2, cited earlier in this chapter.
186                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

possession of Madho, the original grantee, his successor Jagjivandas, and
then the latter’s successors down to Ramjivan, whose full genealogy is
given in the document issued in 1722. Since these documents have come
from the archives of the Gopinath temple at Vrindavan, it may be assumed
that this family of priests were sevaks of that temple. This may explain
why the chakndma of 1626, for the grant of 89 bighas 9 biswas, then held
by Srichand of Madan Mohan temple, refers to the chak of Gopinath
(temple) lying to the east of the demarcated plots, along with that of
Madan Mohan.
   Over 60 hectares of tax-free land in village Rajpur had thus remained
in the hands of the priests of Madan Mohan and Gopinath temples
throughout the seventeenth century. One may be sure that this would
have given them considerable clout in the village. Other Brahman holders,
like Raghunath, whom we encounter in the chakndma of 1691 as the
possessor of two fields, must also have been encouraged to take their
abode in the village.
   Otherwise, however, the features of the village society found in Arith/
Radhakund [Chapter 8] existed here as well. The chakndma of 1626
names three muqaddams of the village and that of 1692 introduces to us
five, three of them appearing as land-holders. We may infer from these
references that we had here a set of oligarchs, rather than a single village
head, though these are not called panch even in the Braj version of the
chakndma of 1692. It is likely that it was these headmen who determined
who would cultivate the vacant land in the village. As we have noted, we
have found plots of village land being cultivated by two peasants residing in
another village, shown by an entry in the chakndma of 1626; and similarly
an outsider (from Nagla Nagu) used to cultivate a field within the village,
as recorded in the chakndma of 1692. Generally speaking, however, we
learn far less about the village headmen of Rajpur than we do about their
peers in Vrindavan and Radhakund.
GOSA’INS
                           CHAPTER 10



A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins
  of the Chaitanya Sect at Vrindavan,
               to c.1740
                               Irfan Habib




The Vrindavan documents on which we have largely relied in our studies
of aspects of social life and local administration in Braj Bhum during
Mughal times were perhaps largely preserved because their possessors
believed that these were relevant to their claims over properties, priestly
offices, or personal rights. For us, therefore, their contexts become clear
only when we distinguish the interests of the different individuals involved
and the nature and course of such disputes as arose among them. One
way of securing this object has been to reconstruct the biographies of
the individuals concerned from the documents themselves. The present
chapter is the result of such an effort.
   In itself the result can also stand as a modest contribution to the history
of the Chaitanya sect at Vrindavan for some two hundred years. The reader
perusing the appended alphabetically arranged notices of the Gosa’ins and
mendicants of the Chaitanya sect will have to bear with descriptions of
the same facts (and disputes) in the notices of different persons, which,
given this mode of organising our information, cannot be avoided. Yet,
hopefully, the persevering reader may still find many interesting pieces of
information about both the internal history of the sect and about aspects
of local administrative history, land systems, social relations, and the
cultural milieu. A reader looking for traces of a particular individual may
also come across some relevant information here.
    A few further words of explanation seem necessary. The Vrindavan
Goswamis (Gosa’ins) had certain factions based on lines of spiritual
 190                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

succession. Of the three major ‘lines’, two were those of Rup and Jiv
Goswami. A Persian document of c.1723 (from collection unspecified),
produced in support of the claims ofJagannath Gosa’in, has helpfully given
us lists of the successors of Rup and Jiv Gosa’in, which are corroborated
by our documents. To these we have added names based on documents
of the post-1723 period. The third line, that of Sanatan, to which the
chief priests of the Madan Mohan temple belonged, given below in the
first column, is reconstructed by us from our documents. The years given
within round brackets are those in which, by our documentary evidence,
the individuals concerned were alive (though not necessarily in occupation
of their holy offices).

                        TABLE 10.1 Lines of Succession

Line of Sandtan_________ Line of Rap Goswdmi____   Line ofjlv Goswdmi
Sanatan                  Rup Gosa in (1568)        Jlv Gosa in (1546-1608)
Gopal Das (1565-98)      Haridas (1593-1611)       Bilasdas (1606-08)
Sri Chand (1613-29)      Gobind Das                Krishan Das (1594-1659)
Gosa in Das (1628-1703) Nitanand Das (1640-43)     Chand Kunwar
Kishor Das (1692-1720) Radha Krishan Das           Braj Kunwar (1669-98)
                         Chakravarti (1643)
Subal Das (1711-24)      Shiv Ram or Seo Ram    Gopi Raman (1706-25)
                         (1648-89)
Kishan Charan (1728-36) Kishan Charan (1689-96) Braj Lal (1712-36)
Ram Kishan (1739)       Gobind Charan
                         (1695-1710)
Ram Kishor (1743-56)    Jagannath (1710-29)
                         Har Kishan (1725)
                          Ram Saran (1732-60)

   Some friction grew between the lines of Rup and Jiv since it was claimed
that the management of the Govind-dev and Madan Mohan temples had
been passed on by Rup to his nephew Jiv (see the entry on JIV GOSA’IN).
This does not seem to have been accepted by Rup’s successors, especially
because they developed close association with the Amber rulers who in         -
1633 not only got the imperial grant held so far by the Govind-dev temple     ,*
transferred to themselves (see chapter 4 in this volume), but also acquired
other plots of land around it and tended to treat the whole complex as        *
their property (see especially entries on KRISHAN DAS, SHIV RAM,               ;
GOBIND CHARAN, JAGANNATH, and GOPI RAMAN).
                   A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                     191

   Owing to the continuons interest of the Amber rulers in the affairs of
Vrindavan, we give below a list of the rulers with their reign periods?

1.   Bharmal (... - 1573)
2.   Bhagwan Das (1573-89)
3.   Man Singh (1589-1614)
4.   Bhao Singh (1614-21)
5.   Mirza Raja Jai Singh (1621-67)
6.   Ram Singh (1667-89)
7.   Bishan Singh (1689-99)
8.   Sawai Jai Singh (1699-1743)

   There was an interlude during which Sawai Jai Singh s younger brother
Bijai Singh acted as raja from 1707-10, Sawai Jai Singh being held as
deposed during this period owing to the support he had extended to an
unsuccessful contender for the Mughal throne (Prince A‘zam) in 1707.12
   On the line of the custodians of the Gopinath temple, Vrindavan, see
the note at the end of the entry under MADHO in our biographical notes
that follow.
   In the following entries I have tried to give an indication of the
whereabouts of the original documents, especially since sometimes the
provenance may indicate the affiliation of the individual mentioned or warn
us about a possible bias in the document. Thus the Govind-dev documents
generally belong to Rup’s line, and those of the Radha Damodar and
Radha Kund to the line of Jiv Gosa’in. The National Archives documents
appear to have come from a family associated with the Govind-dev temple.
The Madan Mohan temple collection mainly yields documents relating
to the successors of Sanatan Gosain. The IVS collection centres on the
Gopinath temple and its custodians. Unfortunately, the photographs of


    1 This list is based on the table provided in G.N. Bahura and Chandramani
Singh, Catalogue of Historical Documents in Kapad Dwara, Jaipur, Jaipur, 1988,
p. 212, The year of Raja Bharmals death is not firmly established.
   2 Formally speaking, Bijai Singhs authority over Amber was established in
official eyes when he received the chiefdom (zamindari) over Amber from
Bahadur Shah I on or before 28 January 1708 and ended when Jai Singh, with
Ajit Singh of Marwar, achieved reconciliation with the Emeperor, with their
principlalities restored to them, on 22 June 1710 (Hadi Kamwar Khan, Tazkiratu’s
Salatin-i Cbaghata, ed. Muzaffar Alam, Bombay, 1980, pp. 24, 95). Our
documents show that Bijai Singh’s interventions were officially honoured as those
of the Amber state even before the year 1707 came to a close.
192                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

many of the documents carry no indication of the collection to which the
photographed texts belong, and so the abbreviation ‘C.U.’ (Collection
Unknown) has to be used in references to them. For the various collections,
the abbreviations used are given here for the reader’s convenience, though
they are the same as those already given in this volume s Introduction.

 CU            Collection unspecified/unknown
 GD            Govind Dev temple, Jaipur
 H             Monica Horstmann, In Favour of Govinddevji: Historical
               Documents relating to a deity ofVrindaban and Eastern Rajasthan
               [facsimile reproductions of documents at end of vol.], New
               Delhi, 1999.
 IVS           Institute of Vaishnav Studies, USA/ Gopinath temple, Jaipur
 Jai          Jaipur
 MM            Madan Mohan temple, Vrindavan
 NAI           National Archives of India
 RD            Radha Damodar temple, Vrindavan
 RK            Radha Kund temple
 VRI           Vrindavan Research Institute, Vrindavan
 Vrindavan     By number put on the photographed document, with no other
               indication of present whereabouts.
 W/Wright      Documents transcribed and translated by Professor J.C. Wright,
               as numbered by him (unpublished file).


   The MM and RD documents are now preserved at the VRI. The
scanned copies of photographs and xerox copies of all the above documents
(except those of NAI) are now preserved in the libaray of the Deparment
of History, AMU, Aligarh.
   For regnal years, employed in dates in our documents, the following
abbreviations are used:
Ilahi            Akbar’s regnal year (solar), used in his later years.
Jah.             Jahangir
Sha.             Shahjahan
Aur.             Aurangzeb
Bah.             Bahadur Shah I
Far.             Farrukhsiyar
Muh.             Muhammad Shah
Other abbreviations include:
annas (ana)      a rupee being worth 16 annas
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                 193

bil.            bilingual (Persian and Nagari/Kaithi)
parg.           pargana
vill.           village

    A more vexed question is that of spellings. The Persian documents tend
to follow certain Indo-Persian conventions, such as writing zunnardar for
Brahman, or baqqdl for Banya, or La‘l (with the Arabic ‘ain) for Lal. These
should perhaps cause little trouble. Further, the Persian documents follow
the local pronunciation. Thus, they consistently spell ‘Bindraban’, which
used to be the popular local form of the name (besides the fully Prakrit
‘Bindaban’), as is shown by the Braj/ Rajasthani texts as well. As the Braj
documents often show, the local pronunciation of Indic words sometimes
diverged even further from the Sanskrit forms than the spelling used in
Persian documents. Thus, we have Braj ‘Se Ram’ and Pers. ‘Seo Ram’, for
the Sanskrit ‘Shiva Rama’. The short vowel ‘a’ usually placed at the end of
a Sanskrit word is, of course, dropped, as in Hindustani; and compound
consonants are avoided or distorted: thus we have Kisan or Kishan for the
 Sanskrit Krishna. The consonants ‘j’ and ‘y’ are always interchangeable;
and so are ‘s’ and ‘sh’, thus ‘Acharaj’ for ‘Acharya’, The Sanskrit consonant
‘v’ tends to change into ‘b’ so much that the Nagari letter for ‘v’ has a
dot placed under it in Braj /Rajasthani documents if that consonant is
 intended, and not ‘b’. To restore the Sanskrit forms of personal names
would seem both pedantic and misleading; and I have simply tried to
 follow the spellings most used in the documents. Thus, for example, I have
 mostly written Gosa’in or Gusa in (the usual spellings in our documents,
 besides Gosa’i, or even Gusa’i), not Gosvamin or Goswami.
    The arrangement by names below follows the spellings of personal
 names as given in our documents and adopted by us. Where the name
 occurs in any Braj document, it is normally assumed to be the form that
 was actually in use. Names occurring in Persian documents alone, whose
 Braj forms are not available, are adopted as they are spelt. However,
 the short vowels, omitted in Persian writing, are restored according to
 presumed Braj forms: thus Gusain’, not ‘Gasa’in. No attempt is made to
 resort to the Sanskrit forms of names, unless they actually occur in our
 documents. The reader who wishes to trace a particular name in this list
 is requested to bear these complexities in mind, and to look always for
 alternative possibilities, for the documents are by no means consistent
 in their spellings of personal names: for example, we have the spellings
 Kishan and Krishan side by side in the same document, while we have
  Shiv Ram in one and Seo Ram in another.
 194                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   The only departures from the practice of following spellings as found
in our records have been the frequent use of the spelling ‘Brindaban’ in
place of‘Bindraban’ of our records, and the substitution of the older and
established names of Mathura and Vrindavan for the names respectively of
Islamabad and Mominabad in documents after 1670.
   A name given in capital letters within the text of an article indicates
that the reader is advised to consult the entry under that name for further
or supplementary information; the same is also indicated by putting the
abbreviation ‘q.v.’ after the name of a person to whom a separate entry is
assigned.
   The alphabetically arranged biographical notices now follow.


Alphabetically Arranged Notices of the Gosa’ins &
Mendicants of the Chaitanya Sect at Vrindavan,
c.1550 to c.1740
ANANDI, Gusa in, s/o Gusa in Gopi (Na)th s/o Gusa in Parbanidas of
the Gaudiya sept (qaum). Mentioned, in doc. of ad 1715, by his great
grandsons.
Had one daughter Satbhananan, & no sons. Brought her up himself, &
married her to Gusain Jadon Indar to whom he gave of his own free will
his haveli & property [in Vrindavan]. After Anandi’s death, Jadon Indar
repaid his debt and freed the land of mortgage; he & his heirs thereafter
held the property. (Statement of Gosain Braj Bhokash (?) and Raja
Ram, sons of Gosain Ganga Ram s/o Gusain Jadon Indar, residents of
Brindaban.) Limits defined of two plots of land, one containing the haveli,
ah 1127/ad 1715: IVS 193A-B. Another great-grandson of Anandi, viz.,
Kashi Ram s/o Kam Dev s/o Jado Indar, purchased a house (havelt) in
Mathura for Rs, 132 in 1735 (sale-deed, MM, dated 5 Shawwal 1147/29
Feb. 1735).

ANANTRAM Pujari
1713 Previously expelled from Radhakund, along with Ram Chand
Ghosh Thakur (q.v.), Swami Mohandas (q.v.), etc., but now readmitted.
Statement of all Jamidar-mokadmdn (zamindars and headmen) of vilL
Arith (vs 1770: Wright 17).
   1716 Again expelled from Radhakund along with the others named in
1713 (NAI-2671/21, of 5 Far., vs 1773).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosd'ins                  195

BABU
A murid (follower) of Syamanand (q.v.). Following Radhakrishan Das
Syamanandi (q.v.) (1692), he, in company with fellow-disciple Lalu,
abandoned the ways of his precursors. Nand Kishor (1704-25) (q.v.) was
their murid (disciple). (GopI Raman’s (q.v.) statement, c.1725: CU)

BAIDNATH, Brahman.
1736 Petitioned that since he & his fellow mendicants were day & night
engaged in the worship of God, & they, as well as other mendicants who
were entertained by them, had no means of livelihood, Re.l might be
levied on each village per annum in pargana Sahar for their benefit, in the
same way as Re.l asA, had been levied annually on each village in pargana
Batala for the benefit of Ghulam Qadiri etc. The precedent having been
verified, the prayer was granted, the payment of one rupee per village in
pargana Sahar to be henceforth made by the peasants (riaya) through
zamindars without any charge on imperial revenue. (Qamaru’ddin Khan’s
parwdna of 18 Muh: MM).

BALLABH Gusa’in.
Known from the Arith/Radhakund sale-deeds, as father of Jiv Gosa’in
(q.v.), with two spellings of his name in the sale-deeds, viz., Ballabh (ah
953/1546 & ah 985/1577: MM; & ah 987/1579: RD); and Balhab (ah
985/1577: MM). The title Gusain/Gosa’in is invariably affixed to his name.

BANSIDHAR Gosa’in, s/o Sundar Das s/o Harnath.
1691 Bought untilled land for Rs. 61/2 from zamindars in nagla Nagu,
Brindaban (sale-deed of ah 1103: GD).
   1706 By now apparently dead, since it is his son, Hardat (q.v.), Pujari
of Radha Rawan temple, Brindaban, who is involved in a land dispute
with Govind Charan (Gobind Charan, q.v.) (Bijai Singhs parwdna of ah
1118: GD).

BHAGWAN DAS s/o Gopal.
 1576 Received grant of 30 bighas in vill. Hasang, pargana Mahaban, by
farmdn of Akbar (certificate, 7 Far. /ad 1717: IVS 157).

BHAIYA BHAGAWAT DAS
1648 Bought from ‘all the panch (eleven of whom are named), big &
small, [acting] jointly’, land of vill, Haidu (Vrindavan), pertaining to Dini
196                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Kunj (limits defined) for Rs.20 (but Rs.34 paid in instalments) (sale-deed
of vs 1705: W.9).

BHAVANAND / BHAVANAND, Swami, Gosa’in, Adhikari of
Gopinath temple, Vrindavan.
1594 (1) ‘Swami Bhavanand, adhikari of Shri Gopinath’, bought V/2 bighas
of land, patti Bhana, nagla Nagu [Vrindavan] for Rs.4 (IVS 208, of ah
1002). (2) Witnesses sale-deed of land in Vrindavan (‘Bhavanand Gusaf)
(W.6 of vs 1651).
   1595 Bought land in pattl nagla Gopa, vill. Dosaich [Vrindavan] (IVS
209 A-B & 202 A of ah 1003) for Rs.16, and 22Vi tankas, and in two
other transactions in vill. Dosaich (IVS 210 & 180A-B (bil.) of ah 1003),
for Rs,4 and Rs.l4(?). Designated adhikari of Gopinath temple, & in Braj
text of IVS 180A-B, also designated gusdl (so spelt).
   1597 Bought land in nagla Gopa, vill. Dosaich, for Rs. 18; designated
gosdi & adhikari of Gopinath (IVS 168 of 41 ilahi /ah 1005, late copy).

bilasdAs (vilAsadAsa).
1606 & 1608 Nominated as heir to his rights of worship and all materials
by Jiv Gosa in (q.v.), with the injunction to pass on the inheritance to
Krishan Das (q.v.). (Sanskrit will with codicil thereto of vs 1663 & 1665
in RD/VRI, reproduced, deciphered, translated, & analysed by Tarapada
Mukherjee & J.C. Wright, BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 309-10, & Plates
I, II, & IV).
    Before 1636 Gifted all the books (postak-ha), bills & docs, (tamassuk-
ha) & the isthals in Brindaban & Radhakund, which he had received from
Shri Jiv Gosa in (& he, in turn, from Shri Rup, Sanatan & Raghunath
Gosain), to Krishan Das (q.v.), as desired by Jiv in his will (bil. statement
by Krishan Das of vs 1694/1637, BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate III
(reprod,) & pp. 316-17).
    Note: Mukherjee & Wright cite Bhaktandmavali for the statement that
Vilasadasa succeeded Jiv Gosa’in as ‘Shebait’ of the Radhadamodar temple,
Vrindavan (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 314).

BINDRABAN (VRINDAVAN), Bairagi.
1704 Follower of Syamanand (q.v.), trying, in collusion with Nand Kishor
(q.v.), to usurp possession of garden claimed by Kishan Priya (q.v.) at
Brindaban (Mukhtar Khans parwana of48 Aur., RD). Same allegation in
Sher Dil Khans parwana of 1 Bah./1707: RD.
                 A Documentary History of the Gosains                  197

BINDRABAN DAS (VRIMDAVANADASA).
1608 Witness ofcodical to Sanskrit will ofJiv Gosa’in of vs 1665 (BSOAS,
XLII (2), 1979, pp. 304, 310).
   1612 Received, along with brother Nand La‘l, a grant of 50 bighas of
land by farmdn of Jahangir in vill. Satova, Parg. Mathura farmdn of Jah.
6, cited in chakndma of ah 1021: RD).

BISVANATH CHAKRABARTI
1713 Previously expelled by vill. headmen from Radhakund, along with
Ram Chand Ghosh Thakur (q.v.), Swami Mohandas (q.v.), etc., but now
readmitted (vs 1770: Wright 17).
   1716 Expelled again from Radhakund with other members of the same
group (NAI-2671/21, of 5 Far./vs 1773)

BRAJANAND, Swami, s/o Gobind s/o Shiv Ram (Seo Ram) (q.v.);
also adopted s/o Gobind Charan (q.v.) s/o Raghunath.
1704 Parwdna of Mukhtar Khan, Nazim (Governor) of suba Agra, 1
Shawwal 48 Aur. (7 February 1704): Swami Brajanands chain of preceptors
(piran ptr) goes back to Rup (q.v.) & Haridas (q.v.), who established the
rules of the mendicants of their sect. They are recluses, who have no
(worldly) desires, and who engage in the worship of Divinity, undertake
pilgrimages within Braj Bhum; they do not pursue mendicancy (gadai)
residence outside Braj Bhum; & they entertain all mendicants, Hindu &
Muslim, who arrive hungry. Conformable to previous practice, & with
agreement of the zamindars of all the parganas of Braj Bhum, a rupee
from each village is to be paid in the year, half of it at each harvest, to
Brajanand, representing ‘the heirs of Rup & Haridas’, without loss of
State revenue; this to be done regularly. The 18 parganas from which
these levies are to be paid are then listed: (a) Mathura & other pargs. on
‘this* (right) side of Jamna R: Mathura, Sahar, Mangotla, 01, Au, Paharl,
Kaman, Khoh, Noh, Khohri, Hodal, Palwal, & Faridabad. (b) ‘That’ (left)
side of Jamna: Mahaban (including the tappa of Mat), Sa'dabad, Jalesar,
Koi, & Anupnagar.
    1705 As wakll (representative) of Gobind Charan (q.v.), along with
Nand Kishor (q.v.), appeared before Ziya’ullah Khan, diwan, suba Agra
(the text of the latter’s parwdna of 49 Aur. is reproduced in a parwdna of
1 Bah.: CU). Obtained this parwdna to strengthen Gobind Charan’s hand
in dispute against Kishan Priya (q.v.). On 1 June 1705, he was called to
the garden occupied by her when an official party went to evict her, &
he pointed out to them the samadhi of Rup (q.v.), the ‘ancestor* (buzurg)
198                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 of Gobind Charan, situated within it. He and Nand Kishor (q.v.) were
 thereafter accused by her partisan Sukh Ram Brahman of beating &
robbing him. This is denied in a statement of official witnesses (GD). The
same endeavour on the part of Brajanand is described from a hostile point
of view by Gopi Raman (q.v.) (c. 1725), who calls him murid (disciple) of
Gusa’in Gobind Charan and subsequently the agent of Gosa’in Jagannath
 (q.v.) (CU; copy, RD). See also a statement on behalf ofJagannath, c.1723,
where too Brajanand is designated a murid of Gobind Charan (CU).
    1706 ‘Brajanand, s/o Gobind s/o Seo Ram, wakil on behalf of Gobind
Charan (q.v.) s/o Raghunath’, appeared before the Qazi of Mathura, to
claim that ‘Kishan Charan (q.v.), s/o Raghunath,’ had gifted by hiba one
haveli (house) & two shops in Mathura to Gobind Charan, & pleaded that
officials of the Baitu’l Mdl be restrained from denying him the enjoyment
of that property (Statement before Qazi: CU of ah 1117).
    1710 (1) Described as ‘adopted son’ of Gobind Charan at his appearance
as the latter’s wakil, to record the gift (hiba) of Gobind Charan’s properties,
etc., to Jagannath (q.v.). The age of Brajanand recorded in huliya: 40 years.
    (2) As agent (gumdshta) of Gusai Jagannath, submitted a plea to Raja Jai
Singh of Amber that a parwdna be issued to permit Gopi Raman (q.v.) to
occupy the kunj (retreat) that his uncle & predecessor, Braj Kunwar used
to live in [but was now occupied by Kishan Priya], within the imperial
grant of 135 bighas at Vrindavan held by the Ruler of Amber.
    After 1710In a statement ofzamindars, chaudhuris,ganungos, ta‘alluqddrs,
    muqaddams (headmen) of pargana Mathura, etc., he is described as
‘brother of Gosa’in Jagannath, who, as sajjada-nishin (successor) of Rup
Gosa’in, is the head of all the Gosd’ins of Brindaban’. Residing there,
along with a group of Bairagi recluses, who are engaged in the worship
of Divinity (Samdiyat) & conducting of pilgrimages (saydhat) within Braj
Bhum, within which the recluses remain, not leaving it for obtaining
sustenance anywhere else. The zamindars etc. voluntarily agree to set apart
one rupee from each village annually out of the sums assigned for sddir-
warid (‘going-&-coming ’) expenses, exclusive of the jama" of the state
revenue (mdl~i wajib-i sarkar), to be regularly paid to him (Brajanand).
(Same parganas as listed earlier under 1704, but Khoh is now called
‘Khoh-mujahid’) (GD).
    1711 Pleaded with officials that Gopi Raman be granted custody of the
haveli [previously kunj] as per terms of Raja Jai Singh’s sanad. See under
GOPI RAMAN. While making this plea Brajanand claimed that he &
Gopi Raman had the custody of‘the lands, haveli, & gardens owned by the
late Mirza Raja [Jai Singh]’ at Mominabad (Vrindavan) (Ghairat Khan’s
                   A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                  199

 parwana, 5 Bah.: GD). Presumably, Brajanand was making this claim as
  the agent or representative of Jagannath (q.v.), the adhikari of Govind-
 dev temple. Brajanand on his own also submitted a petition [to Princess
 Imtiyaz Mahal] about 135 bighas of land that were given in in‘dm at Nagla
 & Dosaich (Vrindavan) to the late Mirza Raja Jai Singh, in addition to
 which the Raja made purchases of land, wherein he built a haveli 8c laid
 out gardens, for which he has proper documents. Direction given that the
 custody of all this property should be left in the hands of Brajanand (with
 Gopi Raman’s name written in above his) (Parwana, 5 Bah.: CU).
     1712 (1) Represented Gopi Ramans case before Raja Jai Singh ofAmber,
 securing from him a parwana, which recognised Gopi Raman as the
 custodian of the Amber rulers estate at Vrindavan, ‘with the concurrence
 of Kishan Priya, q.v., and refuting the pretensions of Gopinath, q.v., now
 dead, and of Kunj Das (q.v.) in relation to the estate (Jai Singh s parwana,
 ah 1124: CU).
     (2) Accused by Kishan Priya, widow of Braj Kunwar, of meddling,
 along with Braj Lal (q.v.), with her haveli 8c gardens in Bindraban,
 whose custody she had given over to Kunj Das (Asafuddaulas parwana of
 1 Jahandar Shah: RD).
     1713 Brajanand & Gopi Raman petitioned the Imperial Court about
 the custody of 135 bighas of imperial grant & other purchased land,
possessed by the Ruler of Amber at vill. Nagla & Dosaich (Vrindavan),
which had been given to the charge of Gobind Charan (q.v.) 8c Braj
 Kunwar (q.v.). When the latter two died, Brajanand & Gopi Raman as
 the respective heirs were granted custody, as borne out by the documents.
Yet Kunj Das has put forward a fraudulent claimant, Gopinath (q.v.), &
 is trying to seize the property. Inquiry 8c action ordered (‘Abdullah Khan
Qutbu’l Mulk’s hasbu’l hukm, 2 Far.: GD; copy, CU).
     1718 One of the two heads (sardars 8c mahantas) of the Gaudiya
sect, the other being Mohandas (q.v.), who were to undertake equitable
distribution of alms & offerings among the mendicants of their sect at
Vrindavan. Mahyar Khans parwana of 7 Far. (CU).
     1723 Appeared before Qazi of Mathura as wakil of Jagannath to
contest successfully Nand Kishor s ‘usurpation’ of 12 biswas of land (Qazi’s
judgement, ah 1136, & a statement made after the judgement; both in
GD). See NAND KISHOR.
     1725 Appeared as wakil of Jagannath (q.v.) before the qdzi of Mathura,
to register Jagannath’s gift of his properties to Har Kishan (q.v.). Brajanand
described himself as s/o Gobind Charan s/o Shiv Ram’; & in his huliya in
that document, his age is stated to be 51 years. Of 7 Muh.: GD
200                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   1734 Signed in Sanskrit as a witness on a sale-deed: ‘Vrajananda,
follower of Rupa Goswami, who is the preceptor (acharya) of the entire
Braj domain by virtue of his attendance upon Radha and Govinda,
enthroned at the focal point of Vrindavan, the capital of the Braj domain’
(Wright 26, of vs 1791: Wright’s transl. slightly modified to suit original
words). He could also be the Virajananda Rai, whose kunj &c land, are
mentioned in the main text of the doc.

BRAJ JANANAND / BRAJ-jANAND, s/o Nitanand s/o Radhanand.
Fifth in the line of Samanand (SYAMANAND); also his grandson or
descendant (lit. son) (statements on behalf of Jagannath, 1723: CU and
GD).
    1703 Came from Orissa in 47 Aur./vs 1759 (=ad 1703) to Brindaban
bringing for Gobind Charan (q.v.) offerings (nazr o niydz) of cash & kind,
as befitted a disciple. Represented to Gobind Charan, who had custody
of the [Amber] Raja’s lands, that Syamanand’s small garden (baghicha)
was not sufficient for accommodating the Bairagis; & so Gobind Charan
allotted him 12 biswas of land ‘on lease’ (‘ariyatan) out of the Garden
(Bagh) of Chirghat, adjacent to Syamanand’s garden, from the Raja’s amldk
(grant-land), for the accommodation of the visiting Gaudiya mendicants,
according to established custom.
   Thereafter Braj Jananand started for home & after some years died
there. He left behind his servant & agent, Nand Kishor (q.v.), who, after
his death, in the reign of the martyred emperor (Farrukhsiyar), during
the regime of the traitorous Saiyid Brothers (namak-hardmdn), usurped
the land (Statement after qdzis judgement, c. 1723: GD). Braj Jananand
therefore must have died well before 1719. Also see an earlier statement
on behalf of Jagannath (CU, of 1723). A document of gift (hibanama)
produced before the qdzi showed that Braj Jananand had received from
Gobind Charan 12 biswas of land as gift (hiba), and not on lease; but this
was (in 1723) held to be illegal since Gobind Charan, not being the owner,
could not gift away the land owned by the Amber ruler (Qazi’s judgement
of 5 Muh. 1136: GD, copy in Jai).

BRAJ KUNWAR / BRAJ KUWAR / VRIJ KUMAR / VRAJ
KUNWAR / VRAJ KUMAR DAS, Gosa’in s/o Nand Kunwar.
Gaudiya Brahman, native of Bengal, since time of forefathers resident
in Vrindavan, living in the haveli [&] gardens of Jiv Gosa in (Statement
c.1718, [of Gopi Raman], bih, RD). Fifth in line of Jiv Gosa’in, successor
of Chand Kunwar (q.v.) (statment on behalf of Jagannath, c. 1723: CU).
                   A Documentary History of the Gosd’ins                 201

    1669 Headmen of vill. Arith (Radhakund) gave an undertaking before
 the qdzi [of Sahar] that since the retreat (kunj) of 'Braj Kuwaru Das
 Gosa’in’ was near the ndla (channel) leading water into the Radhakund,
 they would not till the land there, nor cut down trees or tree branches
 above the Kund (pledge, ah 1080: RD).
    1676 He & Parmanand, q.v., both designated Bairagisy complained to
 Mubariz Khan, officer of Prince Mu'azzam, that in Radhakund, where
 they had been living, some persons were trying to interfere with their land
 & garden (Mubariz Khans parwdna of 19 Aur.: RD).
    1692 Received a retreat (jtunj) at Brindaban in gift (sankalp... o tamlik)
 from its builder Champa Bai, mother of Kishordas, official of Maharaja
 Bishan Singh of Amber (Deed of 35 Aur.: RD).
    1696 Witnessed the hiba (gift) deed by Kishan Charan (q.v.) in favour
 of Gobind Charan (q.v.), signing in Nagari: Vraj Kumar Das (deed of 40
 Aur./AH 1107: GD). This would seem to signify some amount of amity at
 this time between the lines of Jiv Gosa’in and Rup Gosa’in.
    1698 Ancestral holding of 25 bighas of land held by him in madad-i
 ma‘dsh in vill. Tarauli, parg. Sahar, confirmed by Khwaja Muhammad [as
jagirdar], 41 Aur.: RD-19)
    Some time in these late years, he expelled Radha Krishan Das
 Syamanandi (q.v.) from the kunj that had been occupied by Syamanand;
 but he let him return upon intercession by Gusain Kishor Das (q.v.).
 (Gopi Raman’s statement, 1725: Orig. CU; copy, RD).
    1700 Now dead, as recorded in a parwdna issued by an official of the
 Amber court in October 1700, where he is mentioned as an occupant of
 a kunj of Jint (Jiv Gosa’in) within estate of the Amber house (sarkar) at
 Brindaban (Maji Kahi Singh Rathors parwdna ofah 1112: NAI-2671/16).
    His sons having predeceased him, he left behind a widow, Kishan Priya
 (q.v.)—Jai Singhs parwdna of 1712 (CU); Ghairat Khans dastak of 5 Bah.
 (GD); & statement, c.1718 [of Gopi Raman, bil.] (CU).

BRAJ LAL, BRAJ LA‘L, s/o Gopi Rawan (Gopi Raman, q.v.),
adhikari of (establishment of) Jiv Gusa in (q.v.) (CU).
1712 Accused by Kishan Priya, q.v., of meddling with her property, along
with Brajanand, q.v. (Asafuddaula’s parwdna., 1 Jahandar Shah, RD).
   1724 Braj Lal Goshains servant and his chaukidars (guards) go to the
assistance of Nand Kishor Syamanandi, q.v., to repel a posse of horsemen
sent by officials to evict Nand Kishor from the kunj and land occupied by
him (see under NAND KISHOR SYAMANANDI). Statement endorsed
by Kotwdl of Mathura, etc. (CU).
202                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Post-1725 Calls for endorsement of statement (mahzar) by inhabitants of
Arith, alias Radhakund, in which three Brahmans, therein named, are
accused of forcibly selling away land under a mud mound there, which
actually belonged to the adhikaris of [the establishment of] Jiv Gusa in
(CU: undated).
1736 Witnessed purchase of land within one kunj (in Vrindavan) by
Goswami Ram Sharan (RAM SARAN) (in Vrindavan?) for Rs.315
(Wright 27, 17 June 1736). A sign of another phase of reconciliation
between the lines of Rup and Jiv Gosa in?

BRINDABAN DAS. See entry: BINDRABAN DAS
(VRIMDAVANADASA).

BRINDAVAN DAS, adhikari, s/o Narsinghdas adhikari.
1734 'Belonging to the line (pariwar) of Kisandas Kabiraj Gusai’ (q.v.
Kabiraj), buys land in Vrindavan, with Vrajanand Rai or Brajanand (q.v.)
being among those whose kunj and land bordered the plot purchased (vs
1791: Wright 26).

CHAITANYA
Referred to as ‘our Gur(u) Kishan Chaitan’ by Gauranga Bangali (q.v.), in
connexion with a dispute with one Damodardas Radhavallabhi (statement
before the Qazi of Mathura, ah 1064/ad 1654).
   It is strange that this is the sole reference to Shri Chaitanya in the
Vrindavan documents examined by us. He is nowhere credited with either
discovering Vrindavan or initiating Krishna worship there, the latter
achievement being attributed to RUP and SANATAN.

CHANDAR SEN s/o Radha Ballabh.
1718 Continues to hold imperial grant of 30 bighas in in dm in vill. Hasang,
Parg. Mahaban, originally conferred by Akbar in 1576 upon Bhagwan Das
(q.v.), and continuing with his heirs (Hasbul Hukm, Far. 7: IVS 157, zimn
only).
   1724 As wakil of Gopal (apparently GOPAL DAS s/o Anand Das,
priest of Gopinath temple), Chandar Sen petitioned the Diwan of Suba
Agra that, by Akbar’s farman, his client held 30 bighas of land as in‘am
in vill. Daharwa, parg. Mahaban, but the farman Sc former sanads were
lost in ‘the Jat turbulence’ (fasad-i Jat), a public endorsement (mahzar) to
this effect being in his posssession. Officials were directed not to disturb
Gopal’s grant, while all income from it, harvest after harvest, should be
                  A Documentary History of the Gosains                 203

received by Chandar Sen (Qazi-certified copy of‘All Naqi Khan s parwdna,
7 Muh: IVS 181).
   1731 As agent (karindd) of Ram Jiwan Gusain, q.v., appeared before
the qazl of Mathura to contest occupation of a plot of land belonging to
Gopinath temple at Vrindavan, by one Devaki Nandan, ‘Sarsat’ Brahman
(IVS 158)
   Apparently, Chandar Sen was connected with the establishment of the
Gopinath temple, Vrindavan.

CHAND KUNWAR, CHAND KUMAR.
Fourth in line of Jiv Gosain (q.v.), successor of Krishan Das (q.v.)
(statement on behalf of Jagannath, c.1723: CU).
   Since the last available date for his predecessor, Krishan Das is 1659,
and the earliest reference to Braj Kunwar (q.v.), though not necessarily as
Chand Kunwar’s immediate successor, is 1669, Chand Kunwar probably
held his office during the 1660s.

CHINTAMAN, Bangali.
1644 Along with Murli (q.v.), ordered to be removed from vicinity of the
Govind-dev temple, Brindaban, at the instance of Raja Jai Singh (AVam
Khans parwdna, NAI-2671/9).

DAMODAR DAS
1648 Witness in deed of purchase of land in vill. Haidu (Vrindavan), by
Bhaiya Bhagawat Das (q.v.). His kunj is mentioned in the same document
(deed of vs 1705: W.9).

GAGADHARA BHATTA / gadAdhar.
1608 Writes, & signs as first witness, the codicil (of vs 1665) to the will
of Jiv Gosa’in (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 304, 310).
   Mukherjee & Wright (BSOS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 314) cite Bhaktamdla
& Bhaktandmavali for the statement that he was a kathak invited to
Vrindavan by Jiv Gosa’in. Gadadhar Braj Acharaj was recognised as a
precursor along with Rup & Raghunath, by Gobind Charan (q.v.) in
his gift deed of ah 1121/3 Bah./AD 1710 (CU). In a statement of 1713
(Wright 17), Haridas Gosai (q.v.) is described as belonging to the parivar
of Radha-Gadadhar.

GAURANGA, Bangali.
1654 Complained before Shaikh ‘Abdu’n Nabi (the faujdar of Mathura)
204                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

that Damodar Das Radhdballabhl had taken possession of two trees of
the seat (nishastgdh) of ‘our Gur(u), Kishan Chaitan’. Compromise was
arrived at through two ‘mediators (salisdny, with one tree & surrounding
land allotted to each of the disputants. (Statement made before the Qazi
of Mathura, Mathura being apparently where the disputed spot lay. ah
1064: CU)

GOBIND CHARAN, or Govind Charan, Brahmamurat Gosa’in, s/o
Chakravarti Raghunath s/o Gobind Das, adhikdn 8c pujdri of Govind-
dev temple.
 Eighth in the line of Rup Gosa’in & successor of Kishan Charan (q.v.)
  (statement on behalf of Jagannath, c.1723: CU).
     1695 Certain villagers of Gaurua caste of nagla Nagu, Brindaban,
 renounce claims on plot of waste land in Chirghat, Vrindavan, in favour of
  Gusain Gobind Charan (GD).
     1696 (1) Received in gift (hiba) all possessions of his elder brother,
 Krishan Charan, including (the community of) lay devotees (jajman) and
 attendants (sevakan) and management (adhikar), as well as properties,
 specified as ‘cash and kind, havells, gardens, kunjs, shops, land (tilled and
 waste), and villages’, by two similar deeds (of 40 Aur. /ah 1107: CU &
 GD).
     (2) Entrusted also with the custody of 135 bighas of imperial grant,
 retreats (kunj-ha), house (haveli), 8c compound, belonging to Maharaja
 Bishan Singh of Amber, Gobind Charan being styled Brah(ma)murat
 Gosa’in) (Bishan Singhs parwdna, copy: NAI-2671/17; another copy
 (bit), H., 89 & facsimile, end of vol.).
     (3) Cash grant (rozlna) amounting to Rs.360 per annum, to which
 Gobind Charan became entitled as adhikari of the Govind-dev temple,
 was now converted into jdglr, comprising part of Jojharpur, tappa Khora,
 parg. Amber, w.e.f. Kharif (2nd part) season of this year (Raja Bishan
 Singh of Amber, parwdna', H., pp, 193-7, 389, of ah 1108).
     1698 (1) All panch of vill. (nagla) Nagu (Vrindavan) renounce claims
 on plot of land in Chirghatvari in his favour (doc. of vs 1755: W.16)
 (Same statement as made in Persian in 1695 (see above)). Here he laid
 out a garden which is mentioned in the 1695 doc., as well as in the qdzts
judgement of ah 1136/1723: GD.
     (2) He took on farm (ijara) a village (Kunj era) in parg. Sahar in the
jagtr of Haidar Khan for one year for Rs.65 (NAI-2698/8, of 42 Aur.).
 Kunjera is situated a few km NNW of Radhakund.
     (3) Had given a pledge (muchalka) to pay Rs. 16,000 to Raja Bishan
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                   205

Singh [due from some farming contract, presumably]. Represented,
through his sevak Nand Kunwar (q.v.) that later on, but without his
knowledge, Bhagwanta Bangall, had given a muchalka on his behalf for
Rs.3000 more. This latter amount is now remitted. The Raja’s parwana
also describes him as one who ‘offers pujari (rect, puja) of Thakur Jlu’
(Maharaja Bishan Singhs parwana of ah 1110: GD)
    1700 Obtained custody & charge (muhafizat o hirasat) of (one) house,
(two) shops, gardens, lands, retreats (kunj-ha), including kunj of Jlnb (Jiv)
Gosa’in, in Mathura, Brindaban, & Radhakund, belonging to sarkdr (of
the raja of Amber), that was previously looked after by Gosa in Kishan
Charan (q.v.) (Parwana of Maj I Kahl Singh Rathor designating Gobind
Charan ‘Braham Murat Gosain’, ah 1112: NAI-2671/16).
    1702 (1) ‘Govind Charan pujari buys on behalf of‘Sri Gobind-Dev Jlu’,
‘agricultural land’ measuring 2 bighas 15 biswas, bordering land of Gobind-
 Dev temple, in Vrindavan, for Rs.56 fAlamgiri) from Chaube Seo Prasad
 s/o Lekhraj Brahman, whose father Lekhraj had purchased the same land
 for the same sum from Dayal, etc., Gauruas (CU).
     (2) Three persons, Makhna s/o La‘l Chand s/o Jadu, Dunda s/o
 Bhagwan s/o Parmanand, and Madho s/o Sukhdev s/o Syam Singh, affirm
 they had sold three plots of uncultivated land in village Bindraban to
 Gosa’in Gobind Charan, and withdraw any claims they might have made
 to ownership of that land (GD).
     1703 (1) Malik Muhammad’s parwana to officials of Baitu’l Mai (Public
 Treasury), Mathura, not to claim possession of a haveli & two shops in
 Mathura gifted by Kishan Charan to his younger brother Gobind Charan,
 resident of qasba Kaman, on the ground of the former dying ‘heirless’
 (of 48 Aur.: CU). Parwdnas to officials of Baitu-l Mai, Mathura, to the
 same effect also issued in 1706 by Izid Bakhsh ‘Rasa’, Diwan-i Bayutat,
 one asking Baitul Mai officials to desist from collecting rent from the
 property and the other calling for the removal of the haveli and shops
 from the list of escheated property (of 50 Aur., & extract from Diary of
 the Baitu-l Mdl, same year: both CU).
     (2) Braj Jananand, descendant of Syamanand (q.v.), arrived in Vrindavan.
 For his gifts, expression of ‘discipleship’ to Gobind Charan, & the latter’s
 assignment or gift of land to him, see under BRAJ JANANAND.
      1705 (1) Obtained parwana from Mukhtar Khan (Nazim of suba Agra)
  certifying that the imperial grant of 135 bighas in vill. Dosaich (Vrindavan),
  held by Raja Jai Singh, as well as land purchased (zar-kharid), one haveli,
  two shops in Vrindavan & Mathura, a well & some land in vill. Barsana,
 parg. Sahar, & haveli 8c garden built on land owned by him (milki), have
206                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  been entrusted by Raja Jai Singh to the custody of Gobind Charan; so also
 a garden of Kishor Das, servant of Jai Singh. But Kunj Das (q.v.), wakil
 of Kishan Priya (q.v.), has by false representation obtained a. parwdna, by
 the aid of which he has evicted Gobind Charan from a garden (bagbicha)
 & land belonging to the above estate (GD). A parwdna of Ziyaullah Khan,
 diwan of suba Agra, recognises his right to custody of the imperial grant
 of 135 bighas held by Jai Singh (text of doc. of 49 Aur., reproduced in a
 parwdna of Bah. 1: CU).
     (2) Obtained another parwdna from Mukhtar Khan [Governor, suba
 Agra], by which the latter rescinded aparwdna issued in favour of Kishan
 Priya (q.v.), & accepted Gobind Charan s plea that the land claimed by
 her belonged to the land in his custody, as certified by Mukhtar Khans
 own parwdna mentioned in (1) above (Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna of 49
 Aur.: GD).
    (3) On the basis of parwdna referred to in (2), local officials tried to
 evict Krishan Priya, but she resisted, surrendering only a vacant garden
 (doc. of 49 Aur.: GD). See under KISHAN PRIYA & NAND KISHOR.
    1706 (?) Accused of unlawfully occupying the land of Hardatt Gosain
 (q.v.), pujdri of Sri Radha Rawan temple, Vrindavan, whereupon Bijai
 Singh, brother of Sawai Jai Singh of Amber & then apparently attached to
 Prince Mu‘azzam, while designating Gobind Charan as ‘Pujara of Thakur
 Gobind-Dev’, proceeds on the basis of direction from Prince Mu azzam,
 and orders enquiry & restoration of the land to rightful claimant (parwdna
 of ah 1118: GD).
    (2) Secured release of haveli and shops in Mathura from the Baitu’l
Mal, for which see under 1703.
    In or before 1706, Madho Brahman, of the Gaudiya sect, contested
Gobind Charans right to hold the properties he controlled, but his
asertions were rejected on the ground that Govind Charan had proper
authority from the ruler of Amber, on whose behalf he was the custodian.
The decision had the endorsements of the Naib-Qdzi of Mathura, the
Diwan, the agents of the faujdar of Kaman, & Hasan Beg, the Kotwal
(of Mathura), & the agent of the Waqd’i‘ Nigdr (of Kaman?). Copy of
decision, NAT2671/18.
    1707 (1) Obtained parwdna from Rustam Dil Khan, faujdar, 24 Dec.,
who citing a plea in this behalf from the Wakil of Raja Bijai Singh,
declares Gobind Charan to be rightfully holding custody of 135 bighas of
land etc., in vill. Dosaich, belonging to the Raja of Amber, along with
havelis 8c gardens on the Rajas purchased land & rejecting claims upon
them by KUNJ DAS (on behalf of KISHAN PRIYA) & ordering the
                   A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  207

latter’s eviction (of 1 Bah.: CU & Copy in CU). But Rustam Dll Khans
deputy (Sher Dil Khan), on the basis of a previous hasbu’l hukm sent by
Rustam Dil Khan himself, entertained the complaint of Kishan Priya to
the effect that Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor (q.v.) in collusion with
(the temporarily deposed) Raja Jai Singhs officials had seized & pillaged
her house (haveli) in Brindaban; & Sher Dil Khan issued a parwdna for
their eviction on 26 Dec. (RD).
    While Sher Dil Khan criticised Jai Singhs officials for supporting
Gobind Charan’s cause against Kishan Priya, Jai Singhs rival Bijai Singh
also supported Gobind Charan as shown by his parwdna of 5 Shahan
1119/1 November 1707 (CU) and his wakll’s intercession with an official
who issued a parwdna on 29 Ramazan ry 1 (Bah.) /24 December 1707
taking Gobind Charan’s side.
    (2) Entitled to draw Rs.360 per annam for his own rozina allowance,
Rs.600 for the deities’ clothes, etc., & Rs.203 as.6 for pbul daul (festival)
from the revenues of vill. Chatrapurvas Khijurya, tappa Khoh, held by
him in farm (ijard) (Amber official’s parwdna: H., pp. 198-9, 390, of vs
1764).
    1708 Parwdna (issuing official’s seal illegible, date missing) addressed
to officials, thanadars, chaudhuris, qanungos, & muqaddams, of vill.
Mominabad (Vrindavan): the official, having enquired into the dispute,
getting evidence of local notables, holds in favour of Nand Kishor, who
was acting in concert with Gobind Charan, the latter being Raja Bijai
Singh’s custodian (havdladar) of the land that was under dispute with
Kunj Das (wakil of Kishan Priya). This parwdna then reproduces texts
of a hasbu’l hukm of 1 Bah.; a parwdna of Ziyaullah Khan, Diwan of siiba
Agra, 49 Aur.; Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna, 49 Aur.; & a chaknama for the
135 bighas of land, 50 Aur. (CU).
    1709 Instrucitons issued by Maharaja Jai Singh for assistance to
Gobind Charan, ‘adbikdri of Govind-dev temple, travelling to Kaman (Jai
Singh’s parwdna of vs 1766, NAI-2671/25). (Jai Singhs seal bears the year
44 Aur., & proclaims him ‘slave of Shah ‘Alamgir’, evidence that a full
submission by him to Bahadur Shah had not yet been made).
    1710 Transferred by gift (hiba) to his nephew & adopted son, Jagannath
(q.v.) all the goods inherited from Gadadhar Braj Acharaj or Gagadhara
(q.v.), Rup (q.v.) [&] Raghunath (q.v.), the headship of the sect of
Bengali mendicants & other property, the transferred possessions shown
as including 2 ashrafis, 100 rupees, 10 pieces of gold ornaments, 15 of
silver, 100 pieces of cloth, 5 cows, 10 buffaloes, 15 oxen, a cart, a carriage,
one ydbii horse, 25 pieces of bronze & brass utensils, one camel; buildings
208                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

&c wells in Kaman; a haveli and two shops in Mathura, three havelis, kunjs
(retreats), five gardens, & land in Brindaban; two tanks & three kunjs in
Arith, and havelis, gardens, & wells in villages Napdgaon, Barsana, & Jao;
a haveli in Amber; a haveli & a garden in vill, Gobindpura, & a garden in
Sanganer (gift by hiba of ah 1121/3Bah, CU; Copy in GD).
   1713 By now dead (Saiyid ‘Abdullah Khans parwana, 2 Far: GD),

GOBIND DAS
Third in line of Rup Gosa’in & successor to Haridas Gosa in (q.v.)
(statement of c, 1723: CU). The last known date of Haridas being 1611,
& the earliest one of Gobind Dass successor Nitanand (q.v.) being 1641,
Gobind Das must have exercised his office within the period 1611-40.
   Gobind Das was the grandfather of Gusa in Kishan Charan (q.v.) (doc.
of ah 1107/ad 1696: GD), and also of Jagannath (q.v.),

GOBIND PRIYA & KRISHAN PRIYA
1713 Two women among those expelled by headmen from Radhakund
along with Ram Chand Ghosh Thakur (q.v.), Swami Mohandas (q.v.),
etc., but now readmitted (vs 1770: Wright 17).
   1716 Again expelled, both named among the expelled group, with
the suffix Bai added to Krishan Priyas name (Braj portion of bilingual
statement of vill. elders of Arith: NAI-2671/21 of 5 Far./vs 1773). See
Mohandas, q.v.

GOPAL DAS, Gosa’in, Swami, s/o Anand Das (Anant Das) s/o
Jagjivan Das (q.v.) s/o Gopinath, Brahman, of the line of Madho (q.v.)
1696 (1) Witnessed hiba (gift) deed (in Persian) of Gusa’in Kishan Charan
(q.v.), in favour of Gobind Charan (q.v.) signing in Nagari (40 Aut./ah
1107: GD).
    (2) Declaring himself a resident of Kaman, gave all his possessions,
‘residential land, built & unbuilt, houses, shops, garden, retreats (kunj-
ha), cash, and kind*, by tamllk (transfer of property) to his nephew Syam
Charan (q.v.) s/o Jairam Das s/o Anand Das (ah 1107: IVS 176, copy).
    1718 The grant of 500 bighas held by Swami Gopal Das Bairagi,
originally conferred by sanad of Kesari (or Kirat) Singh in vill. Seoni or
Saoli, parg Khandela (sarkdr Nagaur), & two wells in the township of
Khandela, to be held in madad-i ma"ash, now continued by Saiyid Abdullah
Khan (7 Far: IVS 164 & 162). Note: This was obviously a jagirddr s grant
valid for his term only. Kesari (or Kirat) Singh must have been succeeded
by ‘Abdullah Khan as jagirddr of Khandela.
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  209

    After 1721-2 Gopal Das s/o Anand Das s/o Jagjivan Das s/o Gopinath,
 & Harkishan Das (q.v.) appeal for public endorsement (mahzar) of their
 claim to hold 140 (rect. 142) bighas of grant in Brindaban, conferred by
farmans issued by Akbar, the farmans & confirmatory sanads having been
 lost in ‘the tumult raised by the wicked Jats’ (khild-i Jat-i-bad-zdt). (Only
 one parwdna by Ja‘far Khan is said to have remained with the grant­
 holders.) (IVS 165), (A witness* seal bears the year 1134/ad 1721-2).
    1724 Chandar Sen (q.v.), as wakil of Gopal (=Gopal Das?), petitioned
 the Diwan of the Suba of Agra that according to Akbar’s farmdn,, 30
 bighas in vill. Daharwa in parg Mahaban were granted as in‘am, to [the
 ancestors of] Gopal; but the farmdn & former sanads were lost ‘in the Jat
 turbulance’ (fasad-i Jat). He possessed a public endorsement (mahzar) to
 this effect. Order issued that the grant be allowed to be held by Gopal,
 while Chandar Sen should receive on his behalf all its income, harvest by
 harvest (Qazi-certified copy of‘Ali Naqi Khans parwdna, 7 Muh.; IVS
  181).

GOPAL DAS s/o Radha Ballabh, sevak & pujdrl of Madan Mohan
temple.
1565 Received 200 bighas as in dm in vill. Brindaban, parg Mathura, sarkdr
Bayana, by Akbar’s farman of ah 972 (original: MM; the zimn is largely
pasted over). This grant was made at the recommendation of (ba-risdla-i)
Raja Bharmal (of Amber) according to Akbar’s comprehensive farmdn
recording temple grants, 43 Ilaht/1598 (NAI-2671(1)).
    1579 Received 10 ashrafis (gold muhurs) as gift from Narayan, q.v., son
of Lakhya, before his death, the recipient being described as 'piijdri of
Madan Mohan (temple)’ (Doc. of ah 987: IVS 215).
    (2) Wakil (agent) of Jiv Gosa’in in purchase of land in village Arith/
 Radhakund, where described as pujdrl, s/o Radha Ballabh. (Sale-deed of
ah 987: RD).
    1584 Received 100 bighas of kbwud-kashta (‘self-cultivated’) land in vill.
 Rajpur ‘uf/Bilu, parg. Mathura, in kbairdt (charity) from Todar Mal [as
jagirdar]; the grantee being described as sevak of devala Sri Madan Mohan
 (Todar Mais Parwdna of ah 992: RK).
    1598 Reported alive in zimn of Akbar s farmdn of 43 Ilahi, where grant
 of ad 1565 is recorded (NAI-2671(1); MM; copy, GD).
    1613 Reported dead in Jahangir’s farmdn, which converted Todar Mai’s
 grant of 1584 into an imperial grant, conferring it on Gopal Das’s heir, Sri
 Chand (q.v.).
210                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

GOPINATH

 Sisters (female cousin’s?) son of Gopi Raman (q.v.) & daughter’s son of
 Braj Kunwar (q.v.) (Ghairat Khans dastak of 5 Bah., CU, & Statement of
 c.1718 RD),
    1706. Gopinath received a small part of properties & rights when
 Kishan Priya (q.v.) gave away the main rights and major part of properties
 to Gopi Raman, q.v. (NAI 2671/19 of vs 1763). For details see KISHAN
 PRIYA.
    It was alleged later that Gopinath was brought from Bengal by Kunj
 Das (q.v.), who pretended that he was the true successor of Braj Kunwar,
 q.v., although in the Gaudiya sect a daughters son could never succeed to
 a spiritual seat (bil. statement of c.1718: RD).
    1710 Along with Gopinath, Kunj Das appeared before the qazi of
Mathura, claiming to represent Kishan Priya & stating that she had made
a gift (hibd) of 12 haveIts, gardens, etc., in Brindaban, Kaman, Arith,
Nandesar, & Govardhan, to Gopinath, her daughters son. In the personal
description, Gopinath’s age is not recorded, but he is said to have reached
full height (tamdm qad).
    1711 He & Kunj Das were trying to seize haveli         land of the Raja
of Amber, whose custody had been entrusted by Raja Jai Singh to Gopi
Raman (q.v.) & Brajanand (q.v.) (Ghairat Khan’s dastak of 5 Bah.: CU),
& an earlier parwdna of Mu‘tamad Khan to [Imtiyaz Mahal B egam’s
amln,] Shaikh Abu Said, 5 Bah.: CU.
    1712 By now dead, after his supporter Kunj Das had secured by
misrepresentation (khilafnumdi) a sanad (from the Imperial Court) in his
favour as custodian of the property of the Amber ruler (Raja Jai Singhs
parwdna, ah 1124: CU). A statement, c.1718, tells us that Gopinath had
died from an attack of smallpox (RD, undated). See also KUNJ DAS.
    1713 Accused, with Kunj Das, of claiming on basis of forged sanads that
he had the custody of the imperial grant-land of 135 bighas, and havells &
gardens on lands of Raja Jai Singh, obtained by purchase in Brindaban,
the custody of which the Raja himself had entrusted to Brajanand &
Gopi Raman (Saiyid ‘Abdullah Khan’s parwdna of 2 Far.: GD, & copy
of another parwdna of the same minister, same date of similar content
addressed to a revenue official, ‘Atiqullah: CU.

GOPINATH DAS
1608 Witnessed codicil to Skt. will ofJiv Gosa’in (q.v.) (BSOAS, XLII (2),
1979, pp. 304, 310).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                 211

   Mukherjee & Wright (ibid., p. 314) cite Bhaktiratnakara for the
statement that he was Shebait of the Radharaman temple, Vrindavan.

GOPINATH JI
 1608 Witnessed codicil to Skt. will of Jiv Gosa in (q.v.) (BSOAS, XLII
,(2) 1979, p. 310).

GOPI RAMAN / RAWAN Gosain, s/o Damodar Raman [s/o Nand
Kunwar].
Sixth in Jiv Gosa’ins line, brother’s son & successor of Braj Kunwar (d.
1698-1700) (q.v.). (Statement, c.1725: CU; & statement, c. 1718: RD).
   1706 Having come from Bengal in response to letter from Braj Kunwar’s
widow, Kishan Priya (q.v.), was installed by her, according to ‘Hindui’
custom, as possessor of his adhikdr 8c seats (ja-ha), through gift (hiba) by
her, at the end of Sha‘ban 50 Aur./16 Dec. (Statement, c.1718: RD). The
original Braj text of Razindma (deed of agreement) is extant by which
Kishan Priya assigned the major part of properties & rights possessed by
her husband Braj Kunwar to his brother’s son (bhatija), Gopi Rawan (so
spelt), while assigning a minor share of properties & rights to Gopinath
(q.v.) (for details see KISHAN PRIYA) (Nagari text of rdjinama, NAI-
2671/19, of vs 1763).
   c.1710 Some years later when Gopi Raman asked for accounts from
Kunj Das (q.v.), who had been managing the establishment (kdrkhana)
of his predecessor and had possessed himself of all money & goods, Kunj
Das summoned Gopinath (q.v.) from Bengal, & sought to supplant Gopi
Raman by Gopinath through obtaining sanads under false pretences,
although ‘from the time we have settled in this village after cutting
down the jungle, there has been no case of a daughters son getting the
inheritance’ (public statement, c. 1718: RD).
   1710 (1) Gopi Raman’s cause was abandoned by Kishan Priya as
well, because on 7 August Kunj Das appeared before Qazi Qutbuddin
on her behalf to record her gift (hiba) of all her properties, in havelis,
lands, & gardens at Brindaban, Kaman, Arith, Nandesar, & Govardhan
to Gopinath, her daughters son (Statement before Qazi, ah 1122: RD).
This gift apparently included a haveli 8c some land in Vrindavan which
belonged to Raja Jai Singh, 8c it was around this that the dispute raged
subsequently, since Gopi Raman claimed to be the custodian [of this part]
of the Rajas possessions at Vrindavan.
   (2) Vrijanand (Brajanand, q.v.), representing Gusai Jagannath (q.v.),
petitioned Raja Jai Singh of Amber that Gopi Raman, adhikari of Radha
212                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

Damodar temple, desired that a parwdna be issued to let him stay in the
retreat (kunj) where Braj Kunwar (q.v.) used to stay, within the 135 bighas
of imperial grant-land held by the Ruler of Amber, at Vrindavan. This
was because he was the late Braj Kunwars brother’s son & successor. Plea
granted (Parwdna of Jai Singh: H, pp. 205-07, of vs 1767).
   1711 Gopi Raman & Brajanand, claiming to hold custody of all
land, havelis, gardens, etc., possessed by Raja Jai Singh in Vrindavan,
complained that although Gopi Raman was in occupation of part of the
land in the Rajas haveli, by his sanad [see sub-entry (2) under 1710] &
written agreement (razd-ndma) of Braj Kunwar’s widow, Kishan Priya,
yet Kunj Das Kayath, & Gopi Ramans sisters son, Gopinath, had taken
possession of all of Braj Kunwars goods and were trying to seize possession
of the haveli as well. The amin (revenue assessor) and two named chobdars
(mace-bearers) of the Nazirs court respectively were directed to restore
the property to rightful possessors (Mu'tamad Khan’s parwdna to amin of
Imtiyaz Mahal, CU; & Ghairat Khan’s dastak of 5 Bah: CU). Apparently,
Mathura was then in the jdgir of Princess Imtiyaz Mahal.
    1712 Gopi Raman’s claims to haveli & land within the Amber estate at
Vrindavan were now upheld by Raja Jai Singh as against the pretensions of
Kunj Das on behalf of Gopinath, now dead (vide his parwanas to Bichauli
Jagjivandas and two other officials, wih the same text and date. CU: ah
1124).
   1713 (1) Petitioned, along with Brajanand, against Gopinath’s
pretensions over custody of Raja Jai Singhs grant of 135 bighas and other
land, haveli, & gardens at Mominabad (Vrindavan) (Qutbu’l Mulk Saiyid
‘Abdullah Khan’s parwdna of 2 Far: G.D; & another of same minister,
same date (copy): CU).
   (2) Dastak very similar in contents to those of Ghairat Khan (of 1711),
issued again in favour of Gopi Raman, on petition of Brajanand, by
Munlm Khan (RD 118 of 2 Far.)
   Gopi Raman thus succeeded in obtaining orders in his own favour, &
getting Kunj Das & Gopinath evicted from the haveli on Raja Jai Singh’s
land at Brindaban. For this he had to pay much money, & had obtained
assistance of Shaikh Abu Said, amin of Princess Imtiyaz Begam. Gopinath.
then died of smallpox. Kunj Das, though a Kayasth [& not a Brahman],
thereupon displayed forged sanads and pretended to have succeeded to
the headship becoming vacant on Gopinath’s death and had now taken
possession of the disputed haveli (Statement, undated but prob. c. 1718 on
behalf of‘all Gosains, sants,   panch" of Vrindavan: RD).
   1719 Gopi Rawan Das Gusain complained that some people were
trying to usurp the lands that his ‘ancestor’ Jiv Gusa in had acquired by
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa'ins                 213

purchase in Brindaban. Local officials were directed to protect his rights
(‘Abdullah Khan Qutbu’l Mulk, 1 Muh: RD).
    1720 (1) Complained against Nathu Ram, a Brahman of Mathura, that
he was trying to seize & build a walled enclosure (ahdta) in the land
that Gopi Raman had inherited from Jiv Gosa’in at Arith/Radhakund
(Parwdna of X to Badan Singh (father of the famous Jat chief Suraj Mai),
2 Muh.: CU; two parwanas of Ghairat Khan, 2 Muh. RD & MM; copy
Qiparwdna of Qutbu’l Mulk, 2 Muh: RD 18; Chauramans parwdna, year
omitted in copy, RD 34; undated letter ofX (Chauraman or Badan Singh)
to Nathu Ram, designated ‘Brahmmurat Nirmal Gangajal, etc.’, asking
him to suspend the construction of his kunj at Arith (RD): also parwdna
of Thakur Badan Singh, 2 Muh., CU).
    (2) Parwdna of Sikandar Singh (apparently, jagirdar), granting 40 bighas
ilahi in vill. Daharwa, parg. Mahaban, to Gusa’in Gopi Rawan, ‘Mahdnt’
of Thakur Temple (devala) of the kunj of Gusain Jiu, w.e.f. 1127 Fasll
(1720-1): RD 31.
    1721 Complained against intruders who were cutting down trees in
land which he had inherited from his ‘ancestor’ Jiv Gusa’in, who had
purchased it & established tank & gardens therein, at Arith/Radhakund
(Copy: Burhanu’l Mulk Sa‘adat Khans parwdna, 3 Muh. MM).
    1722 (1) Gopi Rawan Das complained that Nand Kishor (q.v.), resident
of Brindaban, had seized the haveli of Kishan Priya (q.v.), wife of Braj
Kunwar, the complainant’s uncle. Kishan Priya had proved her rights to
it and recovered it; but now Nand Kishor & Gobind Charan (q.v.) have
taken possession of the haveli, with cash & goods within it, closed the old
entrance & opened an entrance towards their own lands. Inquiry & relief
ordered (Nizamu’l Mulk’s parwdna, 4 Muh.: orig. CU, copy RD).
   (2) Also complained that his ‘ancestor’ Jiv Gusa’in had purchased land
in Bindraban, on which Kishordas Rajavat, kotwal of Amber, had raised
some buildings that he gifted to the complainants uncle, Braj Kunwar, but
now the Syamanandis, Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor, misrepresenting
the facts, were trying to usurp the land. Inquiry & relief ordered (Nizamu’l
Mulk’s parwdna, 4 Muh.: RD).
   Note: It is curious that Gobind Charan should be mentioned in both
these documents as a current colluder with Nand Kishor, when he was
dead by 1713. The explanation seems to be that these complaints were
an echo of the complaint of Kishan Priya (q.v.) against Gobind Charan
(q.v.) and Nand Kishor (q.v.) in 1707 so that Gobind Charan was deemed
to have been a colluder. See especially entry for NAND KISHOR for this
dispute.
214                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    (3) Obtained a parwana from a high official (seal illegible) requiring
officials of pargana Sahar to protect his property (a garden and haveli)
that he had inherited from Jiv Gosa’in (exact place not stated, presumably
Arith). (VRI, SI. No. 52, Acc. No. 5, of 4 Muh)
    1724 Complained of theft committed in his haveli of ornaments, gold,
silver, pearls, cloth, utensils, etc. Thieves had twice previously taken away
some utensils, cloth, one ox and cart (6 Muh. RD 80 = VRI SI. No. 62,
Acc. No. 82).
    1725 (1) Gopi Raman, describing himself as s/o Damodar Raman,
acknowledges his obligation to pay Rs. 30 to Qazi Nur Muhammad for
having procured sanad of imperial grant of 50 bighas from Imperial offices.
Promises to pay from the proceeds of the kharif season (Bond, 7 Muh.:
VRI, SI. No. 53/Acc. No. 9).
    (2) Jagannath complained against Gopi Raman & Kunj Das of using
three forged farmans in favour of their preceptors (who in their lifetimes
never showed awarenss of them & whose genuineness is not confirmed
from imperial office records) to evict him and other mendicants from their
seats at Brindaban. Officials ordered to give protection to the complainant
and to seize the forged farmans (order of the Vazir Qamaruddin Khan to
All Naqi Khan Rasikh, 7 Muh.: copy GD, Rasikh’s own parwana (GD)
thereon, also a hasbu’l hukm to Raja Jai Singh, to obtain a statement of
agreement (razindma) between the parties 7 Muh.: (GD).
    (3) Upon complaint that Nand Kishor, a murid of Syamanand, had
made use of his residence in a kunj, to defy the authority of Gopi Raman,
who had inherited the kunj from Jiv Gosa’in, Raja Sawai Jai Singh ordered
Nand Kishor to be evicted from the kunj, which was to be restored to Gopi
Raman (Jai Singhs parwana, 7 Muh: RD). This seems to have altered Jai
Singhs position in relation to the rightful claimant, since, until 1724, he
was requiring Nand Kishor to vacate the kunj and land he had occupied,
so that these could be handed over to Jagannath (see NAND KISHOR
SYAMANANDI).
    (4) At the directions of Raja Sawai Jai Singh, the ndlh faujdar, Kirpa
Ram, enquired into the rights to the kunj of Braj Kunwar, and, then,
expelling Nand Kishor, installed therein Gopi Raman Gosain, murid
(follower) ofJiv Gosa’in (Gopi Raman’s statement, for public endorsement
as mahzar, undated: CU, copy: RD).
    (5) A public statement by Gopi Raman, calling for witnesses {‘gosa’ins,
mahajans, chaudhuris, qdnungss, zamindars, and common inhabitants of
village Bindraban’), to the effect that Syamanandis, who had lived in
a kunj left behind by Jiv Gosa’in, in time became defiant, and so Braj
                   A Documentary History of the Gosains                    215

Kunwar (q.v.), of the line of Jiv Gosain’, wanted to evict Radha Krishan
Das, disciple of Syamanand, from the kunj, but relented at his abject
submission. But later, Nand Kishor in collusion with Brajanand (q.v.)
concocted false papers in order to take possession of the kunj in Mukhtar
Khan’s time (as Governor of Agra, last years of Aurangzeb). Kunj Das,
‘one of the followers of Jiv Gosa in’, at last succeeded in getting Nand
Kishor Syamanandi expelled, closing the gate of the kunj. But now Nand
Kishor has got the gate reopened and occupied the kunj despite it being
lawfully a part of the peroperty left behind by Jiv Gosa in (original with
witnesses’ endorsements, CU; copy, RD 27). Undated, but from contents,
prob. 1725.
   In an undated doc., extant only in copy, Gosain Braj Lal (q.v.)
describes himself as son of Gopi Rawan, ‘adhikdri of Jiv Gosa’in’, himself
a resident of Brindavan, and claimant to property and rights acquired by
Jiv Gosa in at vill, Arith (CU: copy). Braj Lal was, therefore, a direct heir
and successor of Gopi Raman.

GOSA’IN DAS / GOSWAMI DAS, sevak of Madan Mohan temple.
1628 A parwdna issued during the interregnum between Jahangirs
death and Shahjahan’s accession, records Sri Chand’s (q.v.) death and
Gosa’in Das’s succession to the grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas in vill. Rajpur
(Radhakund 178, of Jahangir’s 23 ry)
   1632 Presented to Emperor & recognized as holder of imperial grant
of 89 bighas 9 biswas in vill. Raj pur in succession to Sri Chand (q.v.), ‘sevak
of devala of Madan Mohan’, by Shah Jahan’s farmdn (5 Sha.: RK; copy:
MM; also Sadrs tashiha, 5 Sha.: RK).
   1648 Witnessed (under formal name ‘Goswami Das Jiu) deed of
purchase of land in Haidu, Vrindavan, by Bhaiya Bhagavat Das Ji (of vs
1705: W.9).
   Series of certificates from officials about continuance of the grant in
Gosa’in Dass possession on condition of his being alive: 1634 (cert, by
Khan Jahan Muzaffar, 7 Sha.; RK); 1642 (cert, by Azam Khan, ah 1052);
1645 (two copies of cert, by X, 19 Sha.: RK); 1651 (cert, by Khalil(ullah)
Khan, ah 1061: MM); 1657 (cert, by Daud Khan, officer of Prince Dara
Shukoh, describing Gosa’in Das in words similar to preceding, 30 Sha.:
RK); 1691 (cert, by Muhammad ‘Ali, 35 Aur. referring to sadr’s parwdna
of confirmation, with ref. made to original grant issued to Sri Chand:
MM). See below.
   1692 Chakndma (demarcation doc.) for imperial grant, confirmed in
1632, prepared again, for the previous chakndma was lost during ‘the
216                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

disturbances of the accursed Jats’ (fiitur-i Jat-i maqhitr). It notes that
Gosa’in Das was still in possession, with Kishor Das (q.v.) as his wakil or
representative (of ah 1103: RK).
   1697 & 1703 Certificates by Ftiqad Khan & Mukhtar Khan verifying
Gosa’in Dass being in possession of the grant (of 41 & 47 Aur. MM).
   1707 By now (and for apparently some years), dead. Imperial grant
transferred to (his grandson) Kishor Das (q.v.), after certs, by two previous
Sadr-i Juzv (Fazilat chan's parwana, 1 Bah.: MM)
   Note: In Raja Chhabela Ram’s parwana of 4 Bah./1713: RK, there is
an obviously erroneous reference (in relation to the same grant) to Gosa’in
Das being then alive. Even without this reference to him, Gosaindas
seems to have enjoyed a long tenure in his priestly office, from 1628 to at
least 1703—some 75 years!

GOVIND. For names beginning with ‘Govind’ see GOBIND.

HARCHARAN DAS, Gosa’in, resident ofVrindavan.
1710 Boundary of his grant of 50 bighas of uncultivated waste {banjar
uftada) in vill. Sonrakh, parg. Sahar, demarcated on instructions from
Abu Sa‘id, amin, parg. Sahar {chaknama of 4 Bah.: CU).
   1718 101 bighas of madad-i ma’ash udak (?) in Basawar, granted to him
by Raja Jai Singh, demarcated & handed over {Chaknama oil Far.: MM).
   1745 Unlikely to be the same as Haricharan Das who bought a garden
for Rs.250 at Vrindavan to present it to ‘to Gobindji* whose custodian at
the time was Ram Saran (q.v.) (Wright 33)

HARDAT, Pujari of Radha Rawan temple, Vrindavan, s/o Bansidhar
Gosa’in.
1706 Complained to Prince Jahan & Jahdniyan (Mu‘azzam) through
his sevaks against Gobind Charan (q.v,), pujdra {pujari) of Gobind-Dev
temple, for having occupied his land {zamin-i milkiyat). The Prince
ordered the Nazim (Governor) of Ajmer to send a sazdwal (mace-bearer)
to examine the papers. Bijai Singh (of Amber) secured suspension of
this process by assurances of enquiry & justice to Hardat. He issued a
parwana, dated 1 Muharram 1118/15 April 1706 (GD), addressed to two
persons, apparently of some religious status, one being designated purohit,
to check the relevant papers and restore the land to Hardat, ‘Pujara of Sri
Radha Rawan Ji’, if he is the rightful claimant.
   Note: The parwana by Bijai Singh issued at this time, when he did
not yet calim to be the ruler of Amber, indicates that he was then posted
                  A Documentary History of the Gosdi’ins                217

in the retinue of Prince Mu‘azzam (Bahadur Shah) and so was able to
intervene in the matter.

HARIDAS / HARDAS, Gosa in, adhikar! of Govind-dev temple, s/o
Kaidar.
With Rup, he settled at Brindaban, which was full ofjungle & uninhabited,
& they established their sect there (Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna, 48 Aur./
ad 1704: GD). Immediate successor of Rup Gosa’in (Statement of c.1723:
CU). Mukherjee & Wright cite Chaitanyacharitamrita & Bhaktiratndkara
for the statement that he was Shebait of the Govind-dev temple, Vrindavan
{BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 314). A statement of vill. headmen of Arith,
of vs 1770/ad 1713, describes him as adhikdri of Shri Gobindji & of the
line (parivar) of Radhagadadhar (see GAGADHARA). This statement
further says that Raghunath Das (q.v.) gave all his property & papers to
Haridas (W.17). But see entry under RAGHUNATH DAS.
   1593 Bought land in a pattt of nagara Gobindji, Vrindavan, for Rs.93,
Haridas being described as ‘pandit, adhikar! of Sri Govind Jiu’ (sale-deed
of vs 1650: W.4); another purchase for Rs.40 of land in nagara of Nagu,
Vrindavan, was made the same year, & here too he is styled adhikar!, etc.
(sale-deed of vs 1650: W.5).
   1594 Hardas/Haridas,‘s/o Kaidar’, bought land in nagla Nagu &
Bhanan, vill. Dosaich (Vrindavan), on behalf of Raja Man Singh for
Rs.201/^ (& 4 takas) (sale-deed of ah 1002: GD; same transaction in Braj
doc. of vs 1651: Wright 6, but without reference to Man Singh). Note:
Both texts are important for the position of the vill. panch & their rights,
   1598 Haridas, ‘adhikar! of Shri (Govindjl)’ bought land in vill. Dosaich
for Rs.6 (Wright 7).
   1608 (1) Maharaja Man Singh sanctioned a daily allowance of Re.l for
Haridas (as ‘sevak of the temple of Sri Thakur Govind-dev Jiu), with 1
ashrafi (rated at Rs.8), and 1 Re. muhr!, daily for the Govind-dev temple,
to be paid from the ‘Des’ (Amber) treasury (Qazi-certified copy of Man
Singh’s parwdna of ah 1016: NAI-2671/2).
   (2) Signing ‘Haridas’, witnessed the codicil to Skt. will of Jiv Gosa’in
{BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 304, 310).
   1611 Purchased land for Rs.40L in nagla Gopa (Vrindavan), designated:
adhikdri of the devala of Gobind-dev (sale-deed of ah 1020: NAI-2691/1).
   Had received in gift a house (ghar) from Kaviraj (see KABIRAJ) in
Radhakund (Braj text of Krishan Das’s (q.v.) statement of vs 1694/1637:
GD, for which see BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate III & p. 316).
   Note: He is to be distinguished from his senior contemporary Haridas,
218                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

founder of the Bihari Jiu temple at Vrindavan, which received a grant of
25 bighas by Akbar’s farmdn of 1598. For him and his sect of Haridasis,
see Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir, reprint, New Delhi, 1979, pp.
217-30, esp. p. 221.

HAR KISHAN s/o Kishan Charan (q.v.) s/o Raghunath Chakravarti
(q.v.).
1725 Received in gift all the property of Jagannath (q.v.), comprising cash
and goods, haveIts, gardens, kunjs, shops, cultivated land and wasteland
situated in Mathura, Brindaban, Radhakund, Govardhan, Kaman, Amber,
Hindaun, Nandgaon, Barsana, Jaot (Jao), & Sanket, silver & gold, utensils,
cloth, & other articles. The recipient’s age given in huliya: 50 years (deed
of gift: RD).
   1740 By now probably dead, since instead of him Ram Saran is described
as ‘adhikdri of Shri Govind-devjf: see RAM SARAN.

HAR KISHAN DAS s/o Ram Das s/o Narayan Das s/o Raghunath.
After 1721-2 Together with Gopal Das [s/o Anand Das] (q.v.), appeals to
local notables to endorse their claim to hold 140 bighas in madad-i ma'ash
at Brindaban (IVS 165, bearing a seal of ah 1123). Gopal Das was priest at
the Gopinath temple, and so this grant of 140 (rect. 142) bighas belonged
to that temple.

JADON INDAR, Gosa’in,
See under ANANDI.

JADUNATH, Brahman.
1612 Received an imperial grant of 10 bighas ilahi in vill. Sonrakh, parg.
Sahar, by Jahangir        its zimn describing him as ‘Brahman, resident
of Brindaban & sevak of Thakurduara’ (6 Jah.: MM; copy, RK).

JAGANNATH s/o Ram Bhadr s/o Gobind Das, & adopted s/o Gobind
Charan (q.v.) s/o Raghunath.
Ninth in line of Rup Gosa’in, successor of Gobind Charan (statement of
c.1723: CU); sajjada-nishin (spiritual successor) of Rup Gosa in (statement
of zamindars, etc., post-1710: RD).
   1710 (1) Described as s/o Ram Bhadr s/o Gobind Das, & brothers
son & adopted son (pisar-i-lutft) of Gobind Charan (q.v.), from whom
he now received a gift of all his rights and assets given in full detail (for
which see GOBIND CHARAN); his age, recorded in huliya: 40 years
(hiba-ndma of ah 1121/3 Bah.: orig. & copy in GD).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  219

   (2) Pleaded through his agent (gumashta) Brajanand (q.v.) that Raja
Jai Singh of Amber grant a parwana authorizing Gopi Raman (q.v.) to
occupy the kunj (retreat) where Braj Kunwar (q.v.) had lived. See under
GOPI RAMAN.
   1711 (1) Complained against the Bairagi Rup Kabiraj (q.v.) for his
defiant intention of entering Kund-isthal of Gobind-Dev (Bijai Singhs
parwana, ah 1123: RD). Rup Kabiraj was accused of having committed
theft there earlier.
   (2) Kanhau, wife of Gautam/Gaitam Mahajan, gifted a haveli          shop at
Toda Bhiwan (Toda Bhim) owned by her husband to Govind-dev temple,
by way of punbhaint', Gusa in Jagannath was to be given custody thereof
(Mirza Raja Bijai Singh’s bil. parwana: H., pp. 208-09, 392, of ah 1123).
    1712 Entrusted by Nildan (?) (name on seal), an official of Maharaja
Jai Singh, with care & custody of his property at Mathura (a haveli) &
Brindaban (garden-land incl. diwankhana or hall) (NAI-2691/9, of ah
1124).
   1715 Received in gift (hiba) a large baked-brick wooden-roofed haveli
on the bank of the Yamuna from a Brahman widow and another (prob,
her brother). Jagannath’s huliya in the doc. of gift shows his age as 47 years
(JHbanama with qazi’s seal) (MM 68).
   1716 Village elders belonging to various septs, being zamindars
muqaddams of Arith, acknowledge the rights of Gusa’in Jagannath, as
received by him from his precursors, to the custody of the tanks Radha
Kund & Krishan Kund & the control over entrance and residence (amad
o shud) in their vicinity (Bil. Statement, NAI-2671/21 of 5 Far./vs 1773).
   1717 Purchased a garden in Arith/Radhakund from named Gaurua
peasants for Rs.205; here described as adhikari of Gobind Rai (copy of
sale-deed of ah 1129/6 Far.: Copy, GD. Orig.: NAI-2691/11, where
portion containing date is lost).
   1719 (1) Received on behalf of‘Gobind Rai’ (Govind-dev) temple, from
Ms Manohari, wife of Munna s/o Lakhu Baqqdl (Banya) of Khandelval
sept, and her daughter Ms Parbatl, a large pucca haveli with many halls
(aiwanha) and cells (hujra-hd), all well built, in town of Kaman, deed
dated 6 Rabi* I 1131/27 January 1719 (NAI-2691/10).
   (2) Complained to the Vizier Sayyid ‘Abdullah Khan, through a
wakil, that local officials and zamindars were harassing the residents on
the 135 bighas of land assigned to mendicants [of Govind-dev temple] in
Bindraban by their acts of interference in violation of rules and exacting a
per-head tax (sar-shumari) and other forbidden imposts. ‘Abdullah Khan
thereupon issued a parwana (dated 1 Zi’lhij RY 1 Muh./15 October 1719)
forbidding the practices complained of (GD).
220                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

   1720 Obtained a parwdna from Sayyid ‘Abdullah Khan Qutbu’l
Mulk addressed to Ghairat Khan, then stationed at Mathura, on his
(Jagannath’s) complaint against Batiya, etc., of the group of Gaurfiyas],
who had come to stay in the grounds meant for Bairagis, but having
occupied the grounds had now begun cutting down trees in the gardens
[at Vrindavan]—Ghairat Khan was to ensure that satisfactory conditions
prevailed for the jaqirs. (GD, of 1 Muh.).
    1721 Purchased land (2 bighas) for Rs.45 in Vrindavan (vs 1778: Wright
19).
    1723 Contested Nand Kishors occupation of 12 biswas of land from
land held by Raja Sawai Jai Singh in Vrindavan (see BRAJANAND &
NAND KISHOR) (GD).
    1724 Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh asked two Gosa’ins, Syam Charan
(q.v.) (of Gopinath temple) and Subal (=Subal Das, q.v., of Madan
Mohan temple) to settle with Gosa in Jagannath the terms on which the
dispute with Nand Kishor could be resolved. Subal was away at Karauli,
so Syam Charan on his own had the entrance of the kunj (occupied by
Nand Kishor) closed. Jagannath did not agree with this (as sufficient) and
demanded that either (a) Nand Kishor should keep his land, but surrender
the land of the sarkar (of the Amber ruler), while either accepting
monetary compensation for the material of structures (^amla) he had put
up on that land or carrying it away; or (b) he may continue to stay in the
kunj at the pleasure of the sarkar, but undertake to leave the kunj on the
above terms the moment Jagannath so desired. Further, letters exchanged
on the dispute were to be returned & Nand Kishor was to destroy the
main entrance of the kunj and wall it up, confining himself to his own
land. Sawai Jai Singh directed his officer Harbhakt to call representatives
(wakils) of both the disputants to Mathura, & settle with them which of
the two alternatives set by Jagannath was acceptable to both parties, &
submit a report (6 Muh.: GD).
    (2) On failure of this attempt, administrative means were adopted to
expel Nand Kishor, but this ended in fiasco on 28 March in an incident,
 for details of which see under NAND KISHOR SYAMANANDI.
    1725 (1) Made a gift to Harkishan, q.v., of all his property comprising
money & goods, havells, gardens, kunjs, shops, & land, cultivated &
waste, in Mathura, Brindaban, Radhakund, Govardhan, Kaman, Amber,
 Hindaun, Nandgaon, Barsana, Jaot (Jao), & Sanket, gold, silver, utensils,
 parcels of cloth, & valuables, describing himself as s/o Ram Bhadr s/o
 Gobind Das (q.v.) (hiba-nama of ah 1137/7 Muh.: GD).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosains                 221

   (2) Complained against Gopi Raman & Kunj Das for making use
of three forged farmans to oust him from his seats (Vazir Qamaru’ddm
Khan’s order addressed to ‘Air Naqi Khan Rasikh (GD), followed by ‘All
Naqi Khan Rasikh’s own parwdna of 11 September (GD).
   (3) Made a similar complaint to the Imperial Court, which resulted in
a letter from an Imperial official to Raja Sawai Jai Singh directing him to
settle the matter & report to the Court (7 Muh.: GD).
   1727 Purchased land in Vrindavan from one Bairagi for Rs.250
(Baindma in Braj, acc. to NAI’s report, document now presumably in NAI
collection under No. 2691: of vs 1784).
   1728 Purchased plots of land from two Chamars, Khunya and Goyasya,
in Arith for Rs.51 (vs 1785: Wright 23),
   1729 Purchased land (kyari, dressed field) in Arith from Sadaram Gaur
for Rs.61 (vs 1786), (Wright 24 and 25).
   Note: One learns from a sale-deed of ah 1146/16 Muh. (=1733) (NAI-
2691/14) that Jagannath *s/o Gobind Charan’ left behind at least two sons,
Ram Saran (q.v.) & Kashi Ram (q.v.). The land in Vrindavan, according to
this document, was purchased by Ram Saran, while Kashi Ram appeared
as his vakil before the Qazu The latter’s age was then recorded as 50 years,
so Ram Saran was presumably still older. Apparently, Jagannath followed
the custom among the Gosains in preferring Har Kishan, the son of
a predecessor (Kishan Charan) over his own sons, when choosing his
successor for both the spiritual seat & the temporal property.

JAGJIVAN DAS, s/o Gopinath.
The original madad-i ma‘dsh grant of 100 bighas, conferred under Akbar
on Madho (q.v.) (1568-94), & then reduced on account of change of
measuring rod [& introduction of bigha ilahi] to 76 bighas, 2 biswas, was
transferred after Madho’s death to Jagjivan Das [apparently as Madho’s
successor in the office of custodian of the Gopinath temple], whereafter
it continued in his line (Anonymous, parwdna, 1 Muh., citing petition of
Ram Jivan, q.v., 1 Muh.: IVS-159; & Ray Rayan’sparwdna, 4 Muh.: IVS
191-192).
    See IVS-165 (post-ah 1134/ad 1721-2) for the name of Jagjivan Dass
father.

JIV GOSA’IN / JI GUSA’IN / JIVA GOSVAMI s/o Ballabh Gosa’in.
Note: In Persian writing ‘Jiv’ and ‘Jiu’ are written the same way.
   For his father, see BALLABH Gosa’in. Jiv was a nephew (brothers
son) of RUP (&) SANATAN (letter to Mehta Sltaldas, of Shah Jahan’s
222                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

 time, undated: RD). Jiv is rather tendentiously described in (Mirza Raja)
 Jai Singhs parwdna of ah 1069/ 1659, as ‘a sevak of Rup Gosa’in* (GD).
     Purchased land at Arith/Radhakund from villagers: 1546: for Rs.20
 (ah 953: MM); 1577 (ah 985, plots of land purchased for Rs.64, Rs.20,
 Rs.20 Rs.14, & Rs.44: MM); 1578: ditto for Rs.80 (ah 986: MM) [Total
 amount of money paid: Rs.242]. But see below under 1579,
     1558 Purchased land in Vrindavan for Rs.60 (in money) + Rs. 10 (in
 garments) near kunj (retreat) of Rup Gosa’in through Thakur ‘All Khan
 (vs 1615: W.3; Persian version, ah 977/1569).
     1568 Raja Todar Mai reported to Emperor Akbar that Jiv Gosa’in was
 a poor worshipful man. It was ordered that the adhikar (management) of
 the devalas of Madan Mohan & Gobind-dev be entrusted to him ‘as it has
 been given to him also by Rup Gosa’in*. At Jiv Gosa in’s request, it was
 further ordained that he was entitled to receive all the offerings (khairdt)
 at the said temples and to nominate his own successor (Akbar s farmdn,
ah 976: VRI).
    1572 Bought land for Rs. 8 at Brindaban (sale-deed of ah 979: RD).
    1579 Purchased, through Gopal Das (q.v.), from peasants of Arith
 (Radhakund), 6 plots of land for Rs.238 (RD of ah 987). Note: This
could be a fictitious transaction for the same six plots of land are shown
as having been received by Jiv Gosa’in from Raghunath Das, q.v., in
gift in 1588. The individual plots do not correspond to those purchased
purportedly by Jiv Gosa’in in years 1546, 1577, and 1578, where the total
money allegedly paid amounts to Rs.242.
    1584 Received for his idol [at the Radhadamodar temple], ‘death-bed’
gift of all his property from Raghunath Das (q.v.) (Skt. will, RD/VRI; see
BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 318).
    1588 Received in gift (hiba) 6 plots of land in Arith from Raghunath
Das which he had purchased over the period ah 953-985/ad 1546-77 for
a total sum of Rs.238 (doc. of ah 966: orig., VRI; copy, MM). But see
entry under 1579 earlier.
    Well before 1588, Jiv Gosa’in had received gifts or bequests of all their
properties from Rup & Sanatan. Krishandas (q.v.) in a bil. statement,
S. 1694/1637, stated that Rup-Sanatan & Raghunath Gosa’in gave all
their books (postak-ha) & bills/receipts (tamassuk-ha), & their isthals at
Brindaban & Radhakund to Jiv Gosa’in (reprod. in BSOAS, XLII (2),
Plate III).
    1601 Purchased land in vill. Brindaban for Rs.16 (ah 1010: RD).
   Post-1605 Composed a short Sanskrit text celebrating the erection or
completion of the Govind-dev temple in 1590, but referring to Emperor
                   A Documentary History of the Gosains                    223

Akbar (d.1605) in the past tense and closing with this sentence: ‘This
Jiva (lit. soul) must honour the two, Shri Rupa and Sanatan, by name,
attending to the service of the Lord of Shri Vrindavan, that had been
abandoned in the Kali [age]’. It was put up as an inscription in the temple
in vs 1727 (ad 1670) (text & transl. of insc. published by G.N. Bahura
in Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone, ed. Margaret H. Case, New Delhi,
1996, pp. 201-03).
   Jiv Gosain had twelve retreats (kunj) in Vrindavan, in one of which
Syamanand (q.v.) lived, constantly attending on Jiv Gosa in (Gopi Ramans
statement, c.1723: CU; copy, RD). See also SYAMANAND.
   1606 dr 1608 By his will (vs 1663) and codicil thereto (vs 1665), both
in Skt., Jiv Gosa’in left all his rights of (temple) service & effects to Vilas
Das (see BILASDAS) &, after him, to Krishan Das (q.v.) (VRI/RD; text,
translation & analysis in Tarapada Mukherjee & J.C. Wright, ‘An early
testamentary document in Sanskrit’, BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 297-
300, & Plates I-IV).
   Mukherjee & Wright (ibid., p. 315) note that the dates of Jiv’s major
writings range from 1552 to 1592, and that his reputation in Bhakti
theology was established by 1561, for which they cite Devakinandana’s
Vaishnavavandana.
   The year of his death is apparently not established, though 1618 is given
for it by Gopal Narayan Bahura (Margarate H. Case, ed., Govindadeva: A
Dialogue in Stone, New Delhi, 1993, p. 201), no authority for this being
cited by him.

KABIRAJ / KAVIRAj, KRISHAN DAS, Gosa in.
1584 Kaviraj wrote ‘death-bed’ will of Raghunath Das in Sanskrit. (RD/
VRI: BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, p. 318).
   1608 Witnessed codicil to will of Jiv Gosa’in, signing: Krishna Das
Kaviraj (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 304, 310).
   He had a house, at Radhakund, which he had given to Haridas ‘Gusai’
(q.v.) (Krishan Dass bil. statement of vs 1694/1637, BSOAS, XLII (2),
Plate III, p. 316: the Persian text contains ref. to the house of‘Sri Kabiraj
Gosa’in’ but omits the ref. to its being gifted to Haridas).
   Krishan Das Kaviraj was the author of the Chaitanya-charitamrita, a
biography in verse of Chaitanya in Bengali; and he is reputed to have
served as personal attendant to Rup & Raghunath in their ‘last days’. He
also wrote Govinda-lilamrita on Radha & Krishna in Sanskrit (Sukumar
Sen, History ofBengali Literature, New Delhi, 1960, pp. 97-8).
   The family (pariwar) of Shri Kisandas Kaviraj Gusal is referred to in
224                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

a Braj sale-deed from Vrindavan, of 1734 (Wright 26). The purchaser
belonging to it had status high enough for Brajanand, q.v., a leading
member of the line of Rup Goswami, to sign as a witness (in Sanskrit),
hailing Radha and Govind enthroned at Vrindavan, ‘the capital of the Vraj
mandala.

KAMDEV ACHARAJ (ACHARYA).
1612 Received imperial grant of 24 bighas in vill. Sonrakh, parg. Sahar,
‘with sons* (Jahangir’$ farman, 6 Jah,: RK, two copies).

KANHAR DAS, Kayat, sevak of Gopinath temple.
1599 Purchased land of house of Kishan Kankar (?) Baishnav for Rs.25
from panchdyat of vill. Shri Gopinath (Vrindavan). ‘Kayat’ suffixed to his
name indicates his Kayasth caste (sale-deed of ah 1008/vs 1656: IVS 156).
   c.1600 Purchased land from the same panchdyat; here the designation
of ‘sevak of Gopinath’ is added after Kanhar Dass name (IVS 147).
   On this land Kanhar Das Kayath built a haveli or house at the advice
of Jiv Gosa’in (q.v.). When, after residing there for some time, he left for
some other place (pardes), he made a gift of the structure & land to the
Gopinath temple (IVS-171, of 21 Muh. =ad 1739; & IVS-187 (undated,
where the name is given as ‘Kandhar Das of Kayath caste’)).

KASHI RAM
1643 Warned to desist from interfering with the conduct of worship at
Govind-dev temple as performed by Radha-Kishan Das Chakravarti, q.v.,
appointed to that office by Raja Jai Singh (A‘zam Khans parwana, ah
1053: NAI-2671/8). Kashi Rams mother continued to squat on a plot
within imperial grant-land meant for Govind-dev temple; & Raja Jai
Singh issued a parwana, expecting her to be evicted by A zam Khan’s
officials (H., pp. 125-6, 379, of vs 1700).

KASHI RAM s/o Jagannath (q.v.) s/o Gobind Charan (q.v.)
The name of Kashi Rams grandfather given as Gobind Charan in both GD
of 1732 and NA-2691/14 of 1733 is a curious piece of inaccuracy because
Jagannath’s father was Ram Bhadr s/o Gobind Das, while Gobind Charan
was Jagannath’s cousin and predecessor as chief priest of the Govind-dev
temple.
   1732 Appeared before the Qazi of Mathura as vakil of his brother RAM
SARAN to register purchase of a small piece of land in Mathura from Ms
Dayali and her two daughters-in-law. In the huliya he is described as
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                 225

white-haired, both ears pierced, and aged 51 years (GD of 17 February
1732) .
   1733 Appeared before Qazi of Mathura, again, as vakil of his brother
Ram Saran to register purchase of 6 bighas of land in Vrindavan for Rs. 120.
In his huliya his age is given as 50 years (NAI-2691/14 of 18 December
1733) .

KISHAN
For names beginning with KISHAN, see also under KRISHAN

KISHAN, Pandit, PujdrI.
1579 Received 3 ashrafis as gift from the late Narayan (q.v.) s/o Lakhya
(statement before qdzi of Mathura, ah 987: IVS 215).

KISHAN CHARAN / KISAN CHARAN / KRISHAN CHARAN, s/o
Raghunath Das (Chakravarti) s/o Gobind Das.
Seventh in line of Rup Gosa’in & successor of Seo Ram Gosa’in (see
SHIV RAM) (statement, r. 1723: CU).
    1689 Received in gift (hibd) one house & two shops in Mathura from
Seo Ram (Shiv Ram, q.v.), the doc. furnishing names of the recipient’s
father, Raghunath (Chakravarti), q.v., & grandfather, Gobind Das, q.v,
(doc. of ah 1100: GD). This doc. also describes him as the ‘brother’s son’
(a slip for ‘uncles son’ presumably) of Seo Ram. This would suggest that
the descendants of Gobind Das (q.v.) and Nitanand Das (q.v.) belonged to
the same family, within which the office of the chief priest of the Govind-
dev temple rotated. Incidentally, the hibandma shows that Seo Ram still
retained a haveli, which was situated on the northern side of the gifted
haveli.
    1690 Annual cash grant of Rs.360 (Re.l per diem) sanctioned for
Kishan Charan as adhikar! of Govind-dev temple, along with a grant of
Rs.600 per annum for clothes, etc., for the two temple deities (Parwdna of
Maharaja Bishan Singh of Amber: H., bilingual, of ah 1102, pp. 166-175,
385). Shiv Ram, q.v., his predecessor, had also enjoyed this annual grant.
    1692 Mir Husaini s parwdna requiring officials of Baitul Mdl, Mathura,
not to interfere with Kishan Charan’s possession of the property (one
house & two shops) gifted to him by Seo Ram in his lifetime (36 Aur.:
CU).
    1694 (1) Muhammad Baqir’s parwdna to same effect as the prec. (37
Aur.: GD). (2) Statement for public endorsement by Krishan Charan,
 s/o Raghunath Das, s/o Bishan (!) Das to the effect that Seo Ram had
226                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  gifted to him by hiba, a haveli, & two shops in Mathura. Afterwards
 owing to disturbances by the Jats (futur-i Jdtan), he went for some time
 to the Rajput country (mulk-i Rdjputiya), where he took up residence.
 In his absence, finding the houses vacant (i.e. ownerless), Ghulam Nabi,
 darogha of the Baitul Mal, resumed them to the Khalisa (imperial estate),
 and appropriated the rent. Now, however, during the *amal (term of
 administration) of Raja Bishan Singh [as jagirdar^], Krishan Charan,
 coming to Kaman, approached the darogha, but in vain. He, through his
 wakil, then obtained parwanas from Mir Husaini & Muhammad Baqir,
 Bayutat officials of Agra. The darogha has now admitted the same & put
 his seal on this statement. Many other seals of important local personages
 are affixed in endorsement (38 Aur.: NAI-2671/14). From the facts stated,
 it would appear that Kishan Charan had left Vrindavan for the ‘Rajput
 country’ after 1689 and returned to Kaman in or before 1692, when he
 obtained Mir Husaini s parwdna.
     1696 Gifted all his possessions, ‘cash & kind, havelis, gardens, retreats
 (kunj-ha), shops, villages, & cultivated & wasteland in Mathura, Brindaban,
 Radhakund, Kaman, Amber, etc., gold & silver, vessels, clothes, articles,
 cows & oxen, buffaloes, horse, carriages, carts, etc., together with ‘clients
 (jajmdn), servants (sevakdn), &c right of management (adhikdr?, to his
younger brother, Gobind Charan (q.v.). He describes himself as resident of
Kaman, & gives names of father (Raghunath Chakravarti) & grandfather
 (Gobind Das). Two statements: (1) before the nd’ib-Qdzi of Kaman, 40
Aur: CU); and (2) for public confirmation of the gift, signing in Nagari:
‘Gusai Kisan Charan’, with the remark: ‘The Persian text is correct’ (Pdrst
likhi sahi). There are also seals and signatures of other individuals in
Nagari and Persian (40 Aur./AH 1107: GD). In the latter doc. the deed of
gift is termed ‘hiba-nama panchaydtf, perhaps, because it is endorsed by
non-officials and not certified by a qdzi.
    1700 By now dead, for referred to in the past tense with the title
‘Rameshar Gosa’in’ in a parwdna which indicates that Kishan Charan had
the charge & custody (hirdsat o muhafizat) of the estate of the sarkdr
(of Raja of Amber), including [along with?] a haveli and two shops in
Mathura, retreats (kunj-ba) including the kunj of Jinb (Jiv) Gosain &
other kunfs, gardens and land at Brindaban & two kunfs at Radhakund.
This responsibility was now transferred to Gobind Charan (q.v.) (Majl
Kahl Singh Rathor’s parwdna, ah 1112: NAI-2671/16). Acc. to an undated
statement of officials at Kaman (NAI-2671/18), Raja Bishan Singh of
Ambers recognition of Gobind Charan as the adhikdri occurred ‘a few
days’ before Kishan Charan’s death.
                   A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                   227

KISHAN CHARAN / KRISHAN CHARAN, Gosain, adhikari,
Madan Mohan Temple, s/o Soklanand (or Sobalanand) s/o Kishordas
(MM 49 & 51A).
 In Wright 32, of c.1743, he is designated sikhya (disciple) of Goswami
 Subal, while in MM 25 of ah 1171/ad 1758, he is described as ‘(the)
 son of SUBALDAS*, who was his predecessor as adhikari of the Madan
 Mohan temple.
     1728 Krishan Charan, adhikari of Shri Madan Gopal temple, takes on
 mortgage 3 bighas of prepared plot (kyari) against a loan (at interest) of
 Rs.30 advanced by him (vs 1785: Wright 22). Place not stated, but prob.
Vrindavan.
     1732 (1) Since 435 bighas 9 biswas of land were held in parganas Mathura
 & Sahar, under farmans of Akbar & Jahangir and orders of Nazims
 (Governors), by the adhikaris of Madan Mohan temple (Vrindavan) from
 of old, so Krishan Charan Gosain, etc., adhikaris of Madan Mohan, were
 to be allowed full use of the produce (hasilat) of the grant-lands (Maharaja
Jai Singh’s parwana, 14 Muh: MM). Details of villages where the grant­
 lands were situated are furnished in zimn of the doc., 385 bighas being in
 villages ofpargs. Mathura & Sahar under imperial farmans &c 50 bighas in
 vill. Sonrakh, parg. Sahar, by orders of Governors only.
     (2) Purchased for the price of Rs.5,000 a haveli (house) built of brick,
 stone, & wood, on land surrounded by his property, at Vrindavan, from
 heirs of Ballabhdas, including two widows (MM 49).
     1735 (1) Since the chakndmas relating to the imperial grants of an area
 of 174 bighas held by Madan Mohan temple in two plots in vill, Raj pur
 had been lost, a fresh survey was carried out under instructions of the
jagirddr Allahvardi Khan, the chaknama resulting from the survey being
 dated 21 Ziqad 1147 (14 April 1735) (Vrindavan 163).
     (2) The area then coming under a prince’s jagir (jummal-i tuyill-i
 wukla-i Padshabi), an officer of the latter issued a letter to a local official
 Chatrbhoj (with the invocation Ram Ram and the dispatching officer’s seal
 also bearing the legend Shri Ram, his own name being undecipherable).
 This letter instructs the recipient to respect the two grants held by the
 Madan Mohan temple, totalling 174 bighas, 9 biswas, conferred by Akbar
 and Jahangir in vill. Rajpur and to direct the zamindars to pay the revenue
 (mahsul) due from them from the rabi‘ harvest onwards to Gusain Krishan
 Charan Jiu. Dated 15 Muharram 17 ry Muh (7 June 1735) (CU).
     1736 Described as priest of Madan Mohan temple, while purchasing
 land, 243 square gaz in area, containing structures of baked brick, at Arith
228                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

(Radhakund) for Rs.306 (sellers’ tamassuk (receipt), MM 79, of Samvat
1793).

KISHAN DEV BHATACHARAJ / BHATTACHARYA, s/o
Ramankant Chakraborti s/o Raghubhadr, Brahman, Bangall.
1718 (1) Purchased a shop for Rs.34 as. 8, in Kaman; close to his haveli,
‘through Madsodan, shiqqdar (rent-collector) of the sarkar (establishment)
of Gobind Rai [Gobind-Dev temple]’ (sale-deed of ah 1130/7 Far.; MM).
   (2) Purchased for Rs.26 as, 8, a house near his haveli in Kaman; described
as s/o Raman Kant (copy of sale-deed of ah 1131: MM).
   1719 Purchased land in Barsana, parg, Sahar (‘Krishandev Bhattacharya,
s/o Ramakant Chakraboti’) (vs 1776: Wright 18).
   1723 Madad-i ma'dsh of 51 bighas in vill. Sadiya, parg, Mangotla,
demarcated on basis of grant to him by parwdna of Thakur Badan Singh,
5 Muh: MM 364.
   1725 Engaged in building or repairing temple of Sri Radha Kant Jiu in
Brindaban, for which red sandstone was being fetched from Sekhavati &
Bayana (Raja Ayamals dastak, 7 Muh: MM).
    /726 ‘Kisandev Bhattacharya’ (so named) purchased land, 391 Vz square
gaz, in Vrindavan for Rs.98 from a family of goswamis (including two
women) (vs 1783: Wright 21).

KISHAN PRIYA / KRISHAN PRIYA / KRISHNA PRIYA, wife of
Braj Kunwar (q.v.), & daughter of Radha Ballabh, s/o Radha Kishan.
1700 Her husband, Braj Kunwar (q.v.), by now dead (as reported in NAI-
2671/6).
   1704 Local officials endorsed her complaint that by closing the gate
towards her garden & opening a new one towards their own garden,
Nand Kishor (q.v.) and Bindraban (q.v.), Bairagls, followers of Syamanand
(q.v.), who were living in her garden that she held by purchase (zar
kharid) in Brindaban, were trying to seize it. The dispute was to be settled
by judgement of the [qazfs] court according to law. (Mukhtar Khan’s
parwdna, 48 Aur.: RD).
   1705 (1) Mukhtar Khan rescinded the above parwdna on receiving
representations by Gobind Charan (q.v.) through his vakil, Nand Kishor
Syamanandi, to the effect that Kishan Priya had made false statements
through her wakil Kunj Das, q.v; and the land actually belonged, in part
under imperial grant & the rest by purchase, to Raja (Jai Singh), who had
entrusted it to Gobind Charan (Mukhtar            parwdna, 49 Aur.: GD).
(2) Brajanand (q.v.) & Nand Kishor, wakils of Gobind Charan, having
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                 229

 obtained parwdnas from Mukhtar Khan & Ziyaullah Khan (see under
 GOBIND CHARAN), Mirza Bahram Beg, faujdar of Mathura, sent one
horseman & four foot soldiers to evict Kishan Priya from the garden
 she occupied. She surrendered the vacant garden of Kishor Das, to be
 occupied by Nand Kishor as before, but refused to come out of the other
garden, whose gate she closed. This garden contained the samadhi of Rup
 Gosa in (q.v.). On the third day her partisan Sukh Ram (‘Sokh Ram’)
Brahman came out, struck his head against the wall & jumped from the
roof & then went to the Qazi’s court at Mathura to accuse Brajanand &
Nand Kishor of beating & robbing him. This allegation was sought to be
refuted by the officials present & the horseman & footmen sent to evict
Kishan Priya (Statement of official witnesses, 49 Aur.: GD). [For a fuller
account of this incident, see Chapter 5 in this volume].
    1706 She summoned Braj Kunwars nephew, Gopi Raman (q.v.), from
Bengal, and installed him on 30 Sha'ban 50 Aur. (16 December 1706) as
Braj Kunwars successor in adhikar (priestly function) & as heir to his seats
 (jahd), ‘as is prescribed by Hindu custom’, making over to him the haveli,
gardens, etc., at Mominabad (Vrindavan), & giving him a deed of gift
 (hiba) with the seal of Qazi Qutbuddin. The Braj text of the statement,
c.1718, gives her name as Krishn Priya (Bil. Statement on behalf of Gopi
Raman, c. 1718: RD).
    (2) The above date of Gopi Raman’s installation (16 December) does not
accord with a Braj document dated 13 Kartik vs 1763 (Sept-Oct. 1706),
which contains a written statement of agreement (razi-ndma) on the part
of Krishna Priya, handing over to Gopi Rawan (so spelt) all properties &
rights derived from Jiv Gosa in (q.v.) at Vrindavan, viz., his kunj, haveli,
12 other kunfs, gardens, lands, etc., & those relating to Radha-Damodar
temple, as well as at other places, while handing over to Gopinath (q.v.)
properties & rights derived from the grants of‘the Barkhasan Raja’ in the
name of Radha Damodar temple. Neither of the two beneficiaries were to
lay claims over what was being given to the other (NAI-2671/19).
    Note: Tappa Barkhasan is mentioned as belonging to they^ir of Sawai
Jai Singh of Amber in 6 Muh./1724, in a parwana of that chief (GD). It
had, perhaps, a local subordinate ruler.
    1707 (1) Rustam Dil Khan’s parwana, 24 Dec., ordered eviction of Kunj
Das from lands & havelis belonging to the ruler of Amber, on demand of
the wakil (agent) of Raja Bijai Singh, no mention being made of Kishan
Priya (1 Bah.: CU).
    (2) But on 26 Dec., Rustam Dil Khans na’ib, Sher Dil Khan issued
a parwana upholding Kishan Priyas claim: Upon enquiry, required by a
230                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

hasbu-l hukm, it had been found that Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor had
unlawfully occupied, with the aid of Raja Jai Singhs servants, the haveli
which should be returned to her & Kunj Das (1 Bah: RD).
   Note: At this time in the eyes of the Imperial Court, Jai Singh was a
rebel, his brother Bijai Singh being now in Imperial favour.
   1710 Kunj Das appeared before Qazi Qutbuddin, claiming to represent
Kishan Priya, ‘daughter of Radha Ballabh, son of Radha Kishan, & wife of
Braj Kunwar, s/o Nand Kunwar, resident of Brindaban’, to record her gift
of all the havelis & gardens in her possession at Brindaban, Kaman, Arith,
Nandesar, & Govardhan, to her daughters son, Gopinath (q.v.) (R.D.).
Matters thus became complicated with Kishan Priya turning against Gopi
Raman.
   1711 Gopi Raman & Brajanand claimed that they had previously
taken possession of Braj Kunwars haveli with Kishan Priyas permission
(razdnama) (Ghairat Khans dastak, 5 Bah.: CU). Note: Such razdndma
must have been given previous to Kishan Priyas espousal of the cause of
Gopinath, to whom she gave all her claimed property in 1710.
   1712 (1) Kishan Priyas vakil petitioned that she had entrusted the
custody (kbabardari) of her haveli & gardens to Kunj Das; yet Brajanand
& Braj La‘l (q.v., Gopi Ramans son) were unlawfully meddling with the
property (Asafuddaula’s parwdna, 1 ry of Jahandar Shah: RD). Obviously
this was necessitated because Kunj Dass protege Gopinath had died (Jai
Singhs parwdna: C.U: ah 1124).
   (2) Brajanand continued to insist that Kishan Priya had concurred with
Gopi Ramans appointment as custodian of the Amber estate at Vrindavan
(Jai Singhs parwdna: CU of ah 1124). That this was a misrepresentation
of her current attitude is shown by her entrusting Kunj Das with the
management of her property.
   1713 Gopi Raman obtains parwdna similar in contents to Ghairat
Khan’s dastak of 5 Bah./1711 (see above), allowing claims of Gopi Raman
to the haveli in Mominabad (Vrindavan) which Gopi Raman had occupied
with Kishan Priyas agreement, but from which Kunj Das wished now
to evict him after taking possession of the attached garden (UC, of 2
Far.). Kishan Priya is not mentioned as ‘deceased’, but the probability
of her being dead is high, since otherwise she could have disowned the
agreement attributed to her by Gopi Raman.
   It is, incidentally, unlikely that she is identical with the Krishan Priya
paired with Gobind Priya (q.v.) among a group of religious persons,
including Swami Mohandas (q.v.), previously excluded from the vill.
of Radhakund, but readmitted (1713) & then again expelled (1716),
apparently at the behest of Gobind Charan.
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                231

KISHAN DEV BHATTACHARAJ.
 1723 Received in madad-i ma'dsh 51 bighas of''banjar wasteland’ in vill.
 Sadiya, pargana Mangotla, from Thakur Badan Singh, apparently the
jagirdar (chakndma 5 Muh, MM 36A).

KISHAN RAI Gosain s/o Har Rai Gosa in s/o Gopinath Gusa in.
1710 Sold a kunj (with brick & mud boundary wall, & partly roofed with
wood) at Arith for Rs.60 to Gusa’in Radha Mohan (bil. sale-deed of ah
1122/4Bah.: IVS 203).

KISHOR DAS Gosa’in, Brahman (sevak of Madan Mohan temple), s/o
Bans! s/o Gosa in Das (q.v.).
Belonged to the line (silsila) of Sanatan Gosa in, in charge of service
(khidmat) of Madan Mohan temple (4 Bah.: MM).
    1692 Represented (as vakil) Gosa’in Das (q.v.) before amin (revenue­
assessor) of parg. Mathura, with the request for a fresh demarcation of
land (89 bighas., 9 biswas) held under imperia] grant at vill. Rajpur (near
Brindaban) owing to earlier chakndma being lost during ‘Jat turbulence’
(chakndma, ah 1103: RK).
   Before 1700 Interceded with Gosa’in Braj Kunwar (q.v.) to readmit
Radha Krishan Das Syamanandi (q.v.) to the Kunj of Syamanand (q.v.)
(Gopi Raman’s statement, c.1725: CU; copy in RD).
    1700 Road pass (dastaK) for Kishor Das, Brahman, to travel from Agra
to parg. Bari [in sarkdr Agra, near Dholpur] with two yabu horses for
riding, one camel for baggage & seven men on foot (parwdna of Chhabela
Ram, officer under Multafat Khan, 44 Aur.: MM).
   1707 (1) Succeeded to grant of 89 bighas 9 biswas (at Rajpur) held by the
late Gosa indas (q.v.). Held tashiha ndmas (verification certificates) from
two sadr-i juzv (Fazllat Khan’sparwdna, 1 Bah.: MM).
   1710 Found holding office (khidmat) of (chief priest of) Madan Mohan
temple, Vrindavan, and in possession thereby of 435 bighas 9 biswas in
grant as in dm in Mathura and Vrindavan and villages Arith, Govardhan,
Nandesar, and Bathain (details furnished); & possessing haveli & gardens
in Mathura, Vrindavan, Arith, Govardhan, Nandesar, & Bathain. He held
224 bighas 9 biswas in and near Vrindavan, & 211 bighas in Parg, Sahar.
His holding of office in temple and possession of grants was confirmed
through a farmdn, cited in a parwdna by Mu'azxam Khan and Asafuddaula,
with detailed zimn (4 Bah.: MM 50).
   1711 Kishor Das s/o Bans! s/o Gosa in Das gifted, by hiba, cash, goods,
havelis, gardens, & lands in Brindaban, Radhakund, Bathain, Hodal, etc.,
232                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

to his uncle’s son Subal Das (q.v,), s/o Jairam Das s/o Gosain Das. Kishor
Dass age, acc. to huliya: 82 years (hibanama, ah 1123/5 Bah.: MM 81,
qdzi-certified copy).
   1716 The transfer of assets in 1711 did not apparently include custody
of the grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas, at village Rajpur, pargana Mathura.
A parwana of Sayyid ‘Abdullah Khan Qutbu’l Mulk (5 Far.) instruacts
Mahyar Khan (faujdar of Mathura) to respect his possession of the grant,
though his name is misspelt Lokal Das (CU). See also following note
under 1717, and entry under SUBAL DAS.
   1717 As successor holding grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas [at vill. Raj pur]
in parg. Mathura, upon death of Gosa in Das (q.v.), heir of Sri Chand
(q.v.), Kishor Das is found to be alive & in possession of the grant (cert,
by Shamsuddin Husain, 6 Far./AH 1129: MM).
   1720 On report of Rai Hukm Singh that he engages ‘day and night’
in worship of God and entertains ‘many poor and indigent persons and
travellers and has himself no means of subsistence’, Kishor Das was
sanctioned a daily allowance of 4 annas from the tolls (mabsuTi sayir) of
pargana Hindaun, sarkdr Agra (Sayyid ‘Abdullah Khan Qutbu’l Mulk’s
parwana: MM 56: 2 Muh.)

KISHOR DAS SOTI, Chaudhurl, purohit.
1637 Received in gift by way of Krishan-arpan, the house of Raghunath
& Jiv Gosa’in, near Radhakund, from Krishan Das (q.v.) (bil. statement
of Krishan Das, vs 1694; GD, reprod., BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate III).

KOSI DAS, Gusain.
1579 Received 7 ashrafis from Narayan (q.v.) s/o Lakhya (statement before
qdzi of Mathura, ah 987: IVS 215).

KRISHAN
For all names beginning with KRISHAN or Krishna see also under
KISHAN.

KRISHAN DAS /KISHANDAS, Brahm-murat, Gosa’in, of the line of
Jiv Gosa’in.
/594‘Kisan Das’ acts as wakil [on behalf of Haridas, q.v.] in sale of land at
Vrindavan by peasants to Raja Man Singh through Haridas as intermediary
(W.6, of vs 1651).
   1606 & 1608 By will (vs 1663) & codicil thereto (vs 1665), the rights
& effects of Jiv Gosa in were to pass to Vilasadasa (Bilasdas, q.v.) & then
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa ins                 233

 to Krishan Das (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 303-4, 309-10). This is also
 stated in Krishan Dass own bilingual statement (ibid., Plate III) of vs
 1694/ad 1637, according to which the effects included books (postak-ha),
 bills & deeds (tamassuk-ha),      isthals at Vrindavan & Radhakund. These
 having been given by Jiv Gosa’in to Bilasdas, the latter, as instructed by
Jiv, passed them on to Krishan Das. See also the statement of c.1723, for
 the line of Jiv Gosa ins successors. Also see the farmdn of Shahjahan, cited
 below under 1644.
     1637 Gifted by way of Krishan-arpan the kunjs of Raghunath & Jiv
 Gosa’in near Radhakund to Chaudhuri Kishordas Soti (q.v.) (Krishan
Das’s bil. statement, vs 1694: GD, reprod. BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate
 III).
     1641 Obtained acknowledgement from headmen of Arith/Radhakund
 that they had unlawfully sold away (for Rs.20) land which actually
belonged to Rup-Sanatan & Jiv Gosa’in, & that this sale to Khamanand
Brahman stood cancelled (ah 1051: RD).
     1642 Headmen of Arith pledged not to cultivate land through which
a channel feeding Radhakund passed, the land belonging to (talalluq-i)
Gosa’in Kishan Das (ah 1052: MM).
     1644 (Shahjahans) farmdn: Since Akbar had entrusted the adhikar of
Madan Mohan & Gobind-dev temples, Brindaban, to Jiv Gosa’in, and
he in his lifetime had given it to his murid (disciple), Kishan Das, it is
ordered especially in view of the reported ‘integrity, honesty & modest
circumstances’ of Kishan Das, that he should occupy the same office, &
none should interfere in it (18 Sha.: copy, RD 133). The farmdn is referred
to in Islam Khans parwdna of the same year, which calls for entrusting the
adhikar of the temples to ‘Kisan Das, devotee (mutaqid) of Jiv Gosa’in’
(18 Sha.: VRI).
    1645-46 (1) Kishan Das, resident of Brindaban*, complained to officials
that headmen of Arith were cutting down trees & blocking the path to
the Kund, through land belonging to him (Sayyid Lutfullah’s parwdna to
Sukhdev, shiqqddr ofparg. Sahar, ah 1055: RD).
    (2) Headmen of Arith pledged before Rai Sukhdev that they would
desist from cultivating land at head of channel leading to Radhakund or
cutting down trees above the tank (ah 1055: RD).
    c.1658 Gonsai Krishan Das, a sevak ofJiv Gonsai, occupied the seat of the
latter; & Radhakund, therefore, also belongs to him. But one Brahman,
relying upon his wealth, is interfering with his rights there, which ought
to be put a stop to (letter from unnamed devotee ofJiv Gusa’in to Sitaldas,
Brahman: RD, undated but with invocation Allabu Akbar, suggesting a
234                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

pre-1659 date). Sltaldas & his kunj at Arith/ Radhakund are mentioned
in IVS 217, of 32 Sha./1658.
   1659 Raja Jai Singhs parwdna to Gusa’in Seo Ram (Shiv Ram) (q.v.),
sevak of Sri Gobind-Dev temple: Kishan Das lives on the land & in
the retreat (kunj) of the sarkdr (of the Raja at Vrindavan) on account
of managing (the possessions of) Jiv Gusa’in, sevak of Rup Gusa’in,
adhikdri of Gobind-Dev. Out of mischief he has colluded with officials
& misrepresented the affairs of the temple (devala), etc. Jai Singh having
made representation at the Court, an imperial order to J a1 far Khan
(faujdar, Mathura] has been obtained. What status has Kishan Das that
he should by aid of fraud (sakht) interpose himself in the establishment
(sarkdr) of Gobind-Dev? Seo Ram is to consider himself as authorized to
collect offerings (beth-ddri) & manage the land & retreats (kunj-hd) of the
establishment in the same way as the preceding adhikdris of the temple did
(Jai Singh’s parwdna of ah 1069, addressed to Seo Ram, after Aurangzeb’s
accession: GD). A sad piece of humiliation for Krishan Das in his old age:
from now on the management of the Govind-dev temple passed into the
hands of the line of Rup Gosa’in.
   Krishan Das composed a commentary on Jfv’s Krishnarchanadipika
(BSOAS), XLII (2), 1979, p. 314). Not to be conffised with Kabiraj
(Kaviraj) Krishna Das (q.v.).

KRISHNA DASA KAVIRAJ
See KABIRAJ

KUNJ DAS, Kayasth, s/o Jivan Das s/o Raghunath.
A murid (devotee) of Jiv Gosa’in (Sher Dil Khans parwdna, 1 Bah.: RD;
statement in support of Jagannath, c.1723: CU; & statement by Gopi
Raman, c.1723: CU, copy, RD); and hiba gift of 1725 (RD).
   Before & after 1700 Had been managing the establishment (kdrkhdna)
of Braj Kunwar (q.v.) & continued to do so after the latter’s death (1698-
1700) & after Gopi Raman’s (q.v.) installation as his successor in 50
Aur./1706 (statement, c.1718: RD).
    1704 Kunj Das obtained z parwdna from Mukhtar Khan, Governor of
Agra province, as wakil of Braj Kunwars widow Kishan Priya (q.v.), stating
that Nand Kishor (q.v.) & Bindraban Bairagi (q.v.) had unlawfully seized
her garden, this parwdna being one of 48 Aur., preserved in RD. This was
cancelled by a subsequent parwdna by Mukhtar Khan (of 49 Aur.: GD),
where Kunj Das is specifically mentioned as the wakil of Kishan Priya; he
is not so mentioned in the earlier parwdna, now cancelled.
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  235

    1707 (1) Faujdar, Rustam Dil Khans parwana (24 Dec.) issued at
request of the wakil of Raja Bijai Singh: Kunj Das has misrepresented the
facts. He is to be evicted after enquiry; & the possession of the houses
(haveli-hd) &c land is to be given over to Govind Charan (q.v.) (1 Bah.:
GD; copy in CU.).
    (2) Naib faujdar, Sher Dil Khans parwana (26 Dec.): Kunj Das has
brought a hasbu-l hukm with the seal of Rustam Dil Khan referring to
his representation that his client Kishan Priya’s house (haveli) had been
occupied by Nand Kishor & Bindraban (Brindaban), Bairdgis, that they
were expelled on the strength of Mukhtar Khans (first) parwana, 8c the
house returned to her, but that now Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor
have occupied the house again with the help of Raja Jai Singhs officials.
The Emperor therefore ordered enquiry & redressal, Sher Dil Khan, in
company with the qdzi & the news reporters (sawdnih-nigar 8c waqd'i‘-
nigdr), investigated the matter & found truth in Kunj Dass statements.
Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor are to be evicted, & Kishan Priya & Kunj
Das given possession (1 Bah.: RD). See also Gopi Ramans statement,
c. 1725, about these endeavours of Kunj Das: he is said to have done so
for establishing ‘Jiv Gosa’ins right of ownership’ (no reference is made to
Kishan Priya). Kunj Das, it is added, succeeded in expelling Nand Kishor
& closed the gate the latter had built fronting his kunj (CU; copy, RD).
    (3) A fresh hasbu-l hukm issued (30 Dec.) referring to the petition of
Nand Kishor, etc., Syamanandis, to the effect that Kunj Das in Brindaban
had forcibly destroyed the petitioners’ haveli &c possessed himself of
Rs.2,000 of their money. The Emperor ordered enquiry & redressal (copy
of hasbu’l hukm of Bah. given below an official’s parwana, seal illegible:
CU; see under 1708).
    1708 Parwana, issued following hasbu-l hukm of 30 Dec. 1707, refers
to complaint of Nand Kumar & other Syamanandis that Kunj Das had
interfered with Mirza Raja Bijai Singh’s estate (milkiyai) 8c destroyed
the Syamanandis’ haveli & possessed himself of their goods. The former
Governor (suba), Mukhtar Khan, & former Diwan [of the suba], Ziya’ullah
Khan, had found Kunj Das’s claims to be baseless: he obtained a. parwana
from Rustam Dil Khan by false representations & occupied the house
by collusion with the latter’s naib (deputy), Sher Dil Khan. He is to be
evicted, & Nand Kishor is to be put in occupation (seal illegible, date lost:
CU). Statement in support ofJagannath, (q.v.) c.1725 (CU), also recounts
that Kunj Das, a murid of Jiv Gosa in, expelled Nand Kishor & other
Syamanandis; but Brajanand (q.v.) succeeded in re-installing them. See
also under GOBIND CHARAN, BRAJANAND, & NAND KISHOR.
236                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

    1706-10 Some time after Gopi Ramans installation (50 Aur./1706), he
suspected Kunj Das of misappropriating large amounts in cash & goods,
& called for accounts. Kunj Das responded by bringing Braj Kunwars
daughter’s son, Gopinath (q.v.) from Bengal, & sought to set him up as
Braj Kunwar’s successor through misrepresentations. Gopi Raman tried to
 thwart Kunj Das’s schemes by obtaining sanads at much cost (Statement
 on Gopi Ramans behalf, c. 1718: RD).
    1710 Kunj Das, ‘s/o Jivan Das s/o Raghunath’, appeared before Qazi
 Qutbuddin, claiming to represent Kishan Priya (q.v.), & recording her
 act of gift (hiba) of all her property, consisting of 12 plots of land, haveli,
    garden in Brindaban, a house at Kaman, & lands in Arith, Nandesar
& Govardhan, to her daughters son Gopinath (q.v,). Kunj Das’s personal
description (huliya) in the document gives his age as 50 years (RD, of 4
Bah.)
    1711 Kunj Das Kayath & Gopinath had allegedly seized the house
in land belonging to Raja Jai Singh’s estate, where Gopi Raman was
permitted to reside and where his uncle Braj Kunwar used to live, &
also took possession of Braj Kunwar’s money & goods. Emperor ordered
enquiry and redressal. Hasbu’l Hukm to Shaikh Abu Said, ‘amil [& amin
 (revenue collector and assessor) of Princess Imtiyaz Mahal]: GD 5 Bah.,
& Ghairat Khans dastak: CU, 5 Bah.
    1712 (1) Brajanand secured from Raja Jai Singh of Amber the
appointment of Gopi Raman as the custodian of the Amber estate at
Vrindavan. Though Gopinath was now dead, Kunj Das was still trying to
subvert Gopi Raman’s custodianship having obtained an imperial sanad in
favour of Gopinath: Jai Singh’s parwanas of ah 1124, three of which were
issued on the same date and with the same text to three different officials
of his (CU).
    (2) Kishan Priya complained that she had entrusted her own haveli &
gardens to the custody (khabardan) of Kunj Das, but Brajanand & Braj
La‘l (q.v.) were unlawfully meddling with the property (Asafu’ddaulas
parwdna, 1 Jahandar Shah, RD).
    1713 (1) A dastak of a high official (seal unclear) upholds Gopi Ramans
claims to the haveli of Braj Kunwar against the pretensions of Kunj Das of
Kayath caste (of 2 Far.: CU).
    (2) Kunj Das is said to have falsely urged Gopinath’s claims to the
custody of 135 bighas of grant & other lands of Raja Jai Singh at Brindaban
to the detriment of the rights of Gobind Charan & Gopi Raman (Saiyyid
‘Abdullah Khan’s parwdna, 2 Far.: ^azf-certified copy, CU).
    1717 Purchased 4 plots of land in Vrindavan for Rs. 199, the sale-deed
describing Kunj Das as ‘s/o Braj Kunwar s/o Nand Kunwar’, which shows
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’lns                237

that he was now directly claiming to be the adopted son and successor of
Braj Kunwar (q.v.) in the line of Jiv Gosa’in (RD 82, of ah 1129).
    c.1718 Gopi Raman succeeded in foiling Kunj Das’s scheme to put
Gopinath in possession of the haveli in dispute. Subsequently, Gopinath
had died of smallpox, & Kunj Das thereupon put forward his own claim to
headship (sardart), though being a Kayath his pretensions were contrary
to ‘Hindu!’ custom. He had now taken possession of the haveli excluded
Gopi Raman from it. (Statement, bilingoal, undated, on behalf of Gopi
Raman, c.1718: RD 30).
    1723 Kunj Das nominated his nephew Radhavinod Das (q.v.) to succeed
him with all his property (Hindi will, RD/VRI; discussed, BSOAS, XLII
(2), 1979, pp. 310, 320).
    1725 (1) Jagannath (q.v.) complained at the Court against Gopi Raman
6 Kunj Das for harassing him. Raja Jai Singh was ordered to settle the
matter (hasbu’l hukm, of 7 Muh. GD). Jagannath specifically accused both
of forging three farmdns in order to oust him from his seats (amkina')
 (Vazir Qamaruddin Khans parwdna addressed to ‘Ali Naqi Khan Rasikh,
7 Muh.: GD). This suggests a reconciliation had by now taken place
between Kunj Das & Gopi Raman, as is also borne out by the way Kunj
Das is favourably referred to as ‘a murid [follower] of Jiv Gosa’in’ in Gopi
Raman’s statement of c.1725 (CU, copy in RD 27).
    (2) Kunj Das ‘s/o Braj Kunwar (!) s/o Raghunath’ gave in gift his
haveli, with its appurtenances (marafiq) in vill. Brindaban to Radhabinod
 [Radhavinod, q.v.] ‘s/o Parsottam s/o Jivan’. His own huliya on the
 hibandma gives his age as 68 years (RD 141 of ah 1137/7 Muh.)
    1731 Kunj Das ‘s/o Braj Kunwar s/o Kishandas’ (spiritual line!)
 purchased from Koli s/o Sundar 3 bighas, 12 biswas of land in Vrindavan
 for Rs.72. Deed dated 19 Sha‘ban 13 ry Muh (9 March 1731) (RD 91).
    1733 It is not clear whether Kunj Das was now alive since not he
 but his (adopted) son Gusai Radhabinod, now appears as ‘adhikari of
 Radhamadanmohan (temple)’ at Vrindavan (Wright 28, of vs 1790).
    1736 Kunj Das was by now dead. On the prayer of his chela
 [& nephew], Radha-binod, zamindars were asked to pay to the latter
 the revenue due from Kunj Dass grant of 30 bighas in vill. Atas, parg.
 Sahar, or, demarcating it, hand over equivalent waste land to Radhabinod
 for getting it cultivated (letter of Rai Nanda to Sadanand, 18 Muh.:
 RD).

KUNJDASI
1621 Received, jointly with another, 50 bighas (30 in her own name)
in village Kunjera, parg. Sahar, by Jahangir’s farmdn of 16 Jah. By the
238                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

chaknama of ah 1037/ad 1627: RD, the grant was transferred from vill.
Kunjera to vill. Man, tappa Tarauli, same pargana.

LALA Gusa’in
1720 On his plea of large family and lack of means of livelihood received
one bigha of tax-free land in madad-i ma‘dsh, in vill. Nandgaon, pargana
Sahar (parwana with five seals, apparently issued on behalf of... Bahadur,
a jagirddr, RD 142, of 2 ry Muh).

LA‘L CHAND
See under MURLl

LALU
See under BABU

MADHO / MADHAV RAY, BANGALI, s/o Kaval Nairn
 1568-9 Received 100 bighas in vill. Rajpur by Akbar’s farman of ah 976.
 Reduced to 76 bighas, 2 biswas, after reductions on account of changes in
 measuring rod (tandb) [& introduction ofgas-i ilahi]. The grant continued
 in the hands of Jagjivan Das, q.v., & his descendants (Hasbu’l Hukm, 1
Muh.: IVS 159 (Copy) & Ray Rayans parwana of 4 Muh., IVS 191-2, in
both of which the original farman is cited). See also under GOPAL DAS
s/o Anand Das.
    1579 Was in possession of money that Narayan, s/o Lakhya had left
behind, out of which Narayan had paid to him (‘Madho,           21 ashrafis
with payments made to others, plus 14 ashrafis & 2 mans of wheat that he
wished to be spent on mendicants at his funeral. The balance of20 ashrafis
Madho was now paying to Narayans brother, Haridas (statement before
 Qdzi of Mathura, ah 987: IVS 215).
    1594 Witnessed (signing, ‘Madhav Ray Bangall’) deed of purchase of
land in Vrindavan by Haridas (q.v.) (vs 1651: W.6)
    Note: Madho was probably the original founder or main custodian
(adhikari} of the Gopinath temple at Vrindavan. Among his successors
the following occur in the present list: Bhavananad (1594-7); Jagjivan
Das (n.d,); Gopal Das (1696-1724); Syam Charan (1696-1725); and Ram
Jlvan (1719-1739).

MANIKANTH, Gosa’in.
1667 Along with Kamal Nain or Kanwal Nain, purchased land for Rs.34
in Arith from local peasants, & another piece of land from Jagannath of
Rajput Jasawat (=Gaurua) caste for Rs. 3 7 (Bil. Statement before Qazi: IVS
                  A Documentary History of the Gosains                 239

199, of ah 1078). From the statement In Persian of the seller of the second
plot in the same doc. it appears that both Manikanth & Kamal Nam were
Brahman residents of Arith, & connected with the Radha Kishan temple.

MANOHAR DAS
1608 Witnessed codicil to Jiv Gosa’in s will (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979,
pp. 304, 310).

MANOHAR RAY
1713 Previously expelled from Radhakund along with Ram Chand Ghosh
Thakur (q.v.), Swami MOHANDAS etc., but now readmitted (Wright
17).
1716 Again expelled, along with those admitted in 1713 (NAI-2671/21,
Braj part of statement of vs 1773/5 Far,).

MOHAN DAS, SWAMI.
1713 Some time earlier expelled from Radhakund at the instance of the
adhikdri of Govind-dev temple, under whom the katha 8c klrtan were
conducted & assemblies (samdj) held; now, however, he, and Ramchand
Ghosh Thakur, Rup Kaviraj, Govindpriya, Krishnpriya, Visvanath
Chakarvati, Manohar Ray, Anantram pujdrl, etc., expelled with him,
were readmitted to stay in the Kund on behalf of the Brajvast Vaishnavas
and Vaishnavins. This settlement (karar) was to be honoured by all.
Any one contravening it would offend the panch of the vill. Offerings
would continue to be conveyed to Shri Gobindjlus treasury (baitalmal)
from Vaishnavas and Vaishnavins (Statement of zamindars & muqaddams
(jamldar-mokadman) of Radhakund, V5 1770: Wright 17).
   1716 All those admitted in 1713 were again expelled from Radhakund,
being again named in the Braj portion of the bil. statement by village
elders of Arith, in the capacity of zamindars 8c muqaddams thereof. This
was done apparently at the instance of Gosa in Jagannath (q.v.), whose
control over entrants & settlers (amad o shud) & management of the two
tanks, Radha-kund & Krishan Kund, is here fully acknowledged (NAI-
2671/21, of 5 Far./vs 1773).
   Note: All those expelled, readmitted, and finally expelled from
Radhakund, are provided with individual entries in our list.
   1718 Named as one of the two principal heads (sardars 8c mahdntas)
of the Gaudiya sect at Brindaban (the other being Brajanand, q.v.), who
were to undertake the task of equitable distribution of alms among the
mendicants of that sect (Mahyar Khan’s parwdna, 7 Far: CU).
240                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

MURI 4, Bangali.
1644At Raja Jai Singh’s desire, conveyed by his vakil, the group of persons,
Murli, Chintaman, etc., Bangalis, were not to be allowed to come near
Gobind (Dev) temple at Brindaban, & were to be expelled from there.
La‘l Chand, etc., Bangalis, were also barred from going to that devala
(A‘zam Khansparwdna, ah 1053: NAI-2671/9),

MURLIDHAR, Gusai, s/o Ganga Ram, Gusai.
Names of father and son preceded by the designation gusai in the Braj
portion of the bilingual document, IVS 217 A-B, dated 25 Rajab 35
Sha./28 April 1658. Murlidhar here acknowledges that land with a kunj,
10 biswas in area, in Arith, was purchased by him in the name of his
father, Ganga Ram, from Gobind-das, Gopinath and Mohan, Brahman
pujarls, for Rs.24; but that price was paid by Sitaldas (the verb used
implying much respect), to whom, therefore, the property should belong.
Any claim on the basis of Ganga Rams name in the sale-deed (tamassuk),
raised by any heir of Ganga Ram to that property, would, therefore, be
false (daroght). Apparently, Sitaldas was such a well-reputed man that
further details of him (parentage, etc.) were not considered necessary.

NAND KISHOR, Bairagt, Syamanandi s/o (?) Braj Jananand s/o
Nitanand.
Described as son ofBraj Jananand (q.v.) s/o Nitanand, in a Qazi’s judgement,
ah  1136/ad 1723 (GD); but the relationship with Braj Jananand seems
to have been spiritual rather than of blood, since according to another
statement, he was really Braj Jananand’s ‘servant and agent’ (khadim o
gumdshta), left at Brindaban after the latter’s visit (1703) (statement in
support of Jagannath, c.1723. GD). According to yet another source, he
was a murid (disciple) of Babu (q.v.) & Lalu (q.v.) (murids of Syamanand)
who deviated from the path of their preceptor (Gopi Raman’s statement,
c.1725: CU, copy: RD).
   1704 Nand Kishor & Bindraban (Brindaban), Bairagis, murids of
Syamanand, (q.v.) who had been living in a garden belonging to Kishan
Priya (q.v.), were trying to seize it (Mukhtar Khan’s parwdna, 48 Aur:
RD).
   1705 (1) As wakil of Gobind Charan Gosa in, Nand Kishor successfully
contested Kishan Priya’s claims before Mukhtar Khan, by pointing out
that the land belonged to Raja Jai Singh, not Kishan Priya; & Mukhtar
Khan thereupon rescinded the previous year’s parwdna (Parwdna, 49 Aur.:
GD).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                241

    (2) When local officials sought to implement the parwana obtained by
him, Nand Kishor was able to occupy the garden of Kishor Das (?), but
Kishan Priya refused to come out of the other garden. The siege continued
for three days without effect. On the third day Nand Kishor, along with
Brajanand (wakil of Gobind Charan), was accused of beating & robbing
Kishan Priya’s partisan, Sukh Ram (‘Sokh Ram’) Brahman (Statement of
members of official party 49 Aur.: GD). See Chapter 5 of this volume for
a fuller account of the incident.
    1707 (1) By now the haveli under dispute had been ‘unlawfully’ occupied
by Gobind Charan & Nand Kishor, with the assistance of officials of Raja
Jai Singh (Sher Dil Khan’s parwana 2 Dec RD).
    (2) In his risala (note) Raja Jai Singh’s brother and rival, Bijai Singh
(11 November), addressing Nand Kishor, held Gobind Charan to be the
custodian of the Amber estate at Vrindavan and stated that the kunj in
which Syamanand had lived, had been converted into a haveli by Kishordas
Rajawat, who then handed it over to Radhakishan Syamanandi (q.v.).
On the latter’s death he installed Nand Kishor therein. Since the original
 kunj was built on land held by Amber rulers, Bijai Singh cofirmed these
arrangements (risala of ah 1119: CU). But contrary official directions
were also received. Na’ib faujdar, Sherdil Khan, directed (26 Dec.), after
 receipt of a hasbu-l hukm for enquiry & redressal, issued upon Kishan
 Priya’s complaint (through Kunj Das), that Nand Kishor & Bindraban be
 expelled from the haveli (Parwana, 1 Bah.: RD). Meanwhile the Faujdar,
 Rustam Dil Khan, had issued (24 Dec.) a parwana entertaining the
 complaint of Govind Charan against Kunj Das & rescinding his previous
parwana (1 Bah.: GD).
     (3) A hasbu-l hukm was issued on complaint of Nand Kishor that Kunj
 Das had destroyed his haveli & interfered with Raja Jai Singhs estate;
 it ordered enquiry & redressal (CU). The upshot seems to have been
 that Nand Kishor Syamanandi was installed in the kunj, garden or haveli,
 which was disputed between the lines of Rup Gosa in (Gobind Charan)
 & Jiv Gosa in (Kishan Priya & Kunj Das). See statements in support of
 Jagannath, c.1723, made before & after Qazi’s judgement (CU & GD). See
 also Gopi Ramans statement, c. 1725 (CU; copy, RD). The land concerned
 contained the kunj where Syamanand had lived in the time of Jiv Gosa in,
 together with another plot, 12 biswas in all, which Gobind Charan had
 given either by hiba (gift) or lease (‘ariyatari) to Braj Jananand, q.v.
     1719-20 After the death of Braj Jananand away in Orissa, & of Gobind
 Charan, & during the regime of the Namak Hardman (Sayyid Brothers,
  1719-20), Nand Kishor began to claim a plot comprising 12 biswas of
242                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

  land for his own use on the basis of a claimed gift from Gobind Charan
  to Braj Jananand. In this he obtained assistance of officials, Bhlm Singh
 & Jogul Arham (?), etc., by bribery & false papers. He built a new big
 gate, without permission of Jagannath, Gobind Charan s successor, &
 established a campsite for horses, cows, carriage (bahal), etc., with trees
 grown taller so that ten to twelve or more of his followers (Agarguria =
 Oriya?) now stayed there (Statement for public endorsement on behalf of
 Jagannath; CU, undated, but preceding Qazi’s judgement for which see
 under 1723).
     1722 (1) Nand Kishor was accused by Gopi Raman (‘Gopi Rawan Das’)
 (q.v.) of trying to seize the haveli in Brindaban belonging to Kishan Priya
 (q.v.), which previously Nand Kishor had been obliged to surrender to the
 latter after she had proved her claims. Now again he & Gobind Charan (!)
 have taken possession of the haveli, seized the money & goods kept there,
 & altered entrances. Inquiry & relief ordered (Copy of Nizamu’l Mulks
parwdna, 4 Muh.: RD). [Gobind Charan was actually dead by this time].
     (2) Accused, along with Syamanandis & Gobind Charan (!), of trying
 to usurp land & buildings in Brindaban, which by lawful inheritance
 should have come to Gopi Raman, the accuser. Inquiry & relief ordered
 (Nizamu’l Mulks parwdna, orig.; RD).
     1723 (1) The Qazi of Mathura heard suit of Jagannath (wakil:
Brajanand) against Nand Kishor (wakil: Syam Das, q.v.) in the dispute
over 12 biswas of land. On Nand Kishor s behalf, a doc. of hiba of the land
to Braj Jananand by Gobind Charan, was produced; but this was held
to be invalid, since the property (both by imperial grant & such as was
acquired) belonged to the Raja of Amber, and Gobind Charan, being in
the nature of its custodian, could not gift it away on his own. Therefore
Nand Kishor was to be evicted & Jagannath installed as custodian on
behalf of Raja Jai Singh (GD of 5 Muh.; copy, Jaipur),
    (2) Upon the qdzi’s judgement, Nand Kishor s wakil agreed to vacate the
garden & close the big gate. He went out of Brindaban with Nand Kishor
& left the place (Statement with seal of Malukchand, Naib Faujdar, and
signatures of local officials: GD).
    1724 (1) Nand Kishor did not in fact vacate the land under dispute, so
now Sawai Jai Singh appointed two other Gosai’ins Syam Charan (q.v.)
and Subal Das (q.v.) along with Jagannath to settle the dispute. The ,
terms Jagannath offered were: either that Nand Kishor vacated the land
& obtained the current price of the building materials from Jagannath or
carried them away; or that he stayed on the land, after destroying the big
gate & walling it, and undertook to depart whenever asked to do so by
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa ’ins                 243

Jagannath. Syam Charan had got the door of Nand Kishors kunj closed,
but this did not satisfy Jagannath (Maharaja Jai Singhs parwdna, of 6
Muh., GD).
   (2) Apparently, on the failure of this attempt at reconciliation, an effort
was made to expel Nand Kishor from the land and kunj he had occupied.
Spurred by parwanas from Raja Aya Mai (Minister at the Court) and
Raja Sawai Jai Singh, Harbhakt Rai, Deputy-Governor of Agra Province,
pressed his deputy at Mathura, Mehta Gokuldas, to enforce Nand Kishor’s
expulsion from the property illegally occupied by him, with a view to
handing it over to Jagannath Gosa’in. On 28 March 1724 a posse of
horsemen (sawdranj was sent to bring Nand Kishor to Mathura to have
the case decided in the court (‘adalat), attended by imperial officials.
When the horsemen laid siege to the gate of Nand Kishor’s kunj & land,
the servants of Braj Lal (q.v.), son of Gopi Raman (q.v.), came to his
assistance and, with others from inside, physically resisted the horsemen.
A bairagi with a dagger (jamdhar) threatened to kill anyone who came
near and then kill himself. After meeting such ‘disobedience and unruly
conduct’ the horsemen withdrew to report to Harbhakt Rai—Statement
endorsed by Sultan Khan, kotwal of Mathura, agents of sawanih-nigar,
wdqia-nigdr &c harkdra (all official news-reproters), and an official of
Sawai Jai Singh, with their seals, and signatures of several witnesses in
Nagari (CU).
   It seems that there was some settlement made between Nand Kishor
& Jagannath for in 1725 there was now a dispute over the same property
between Gopi Raman & Jagannath, and also between Gopi Raman &
Nand Kishor.
   1725 The same land with kunj &c big gate at Vrindavan had also been
the subject of dispute between Gopi Raman & Jagannath. The latter’s
predecessor, through Brajanand, had got possession through a parwdna
during Mukhtar Khans time (1705-06). Kunj Das (q.v.) had then set
matters right by securing the claims of Jiv Gusa in’s line & getting Nand
Kishor Syamanandi expelled from it & destroying the gate he had built,
during the term of Rustam Dil Khan as faujddr. Now, however, Nand
Kishor had established himselfforcibly & set up the gate again. The matter
being brought to the notice of Raja Sawai Jai Singh, at his direction, the
na’ibfaujdar Kirpa Ram, enquired into the rights to the kunj, Sc finding
Gopi Raman to be the rightful possessor of the property of Jiv Gusa in,
expelled Nand Kishor along with his followers & goods & installed Gopi
Raman therein (Gopi Raman’s statement for public endorsement, CU;
copy: RD). This was what Sawai Jai Singh had also ordered: Nand Kishor,
244                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

disciple {murid) of Syamanand Bairagi, was to be expelled from the kunj
belonging to Gopi Raman in vill. Brindaban, and the kunj was to be
handed over to the latter (Jai Singhs parwana, 7 Muh.: RD: VRI, SI. no.
4b, acc. no. 28). Here Nand Kishor departs from our record.

NAND KUNWAR
1698 'Sevak of Gobind Charan, adhikari of Thakur Gobind-dev Jlu’,
represented the latter before Maharaja Bishan Singh of Amber over
payment due from Gobind Charan (q.v.) (Maharaja Bishan Singhs
parwana, ah 1110: GD).

NARAYAN s/o Lakhya
 1579 Now dead. Had possessions amounting to 90 ashrajis (gold muhurs),
 Rs.4, & 22 mans of wheat, out of which he in his lifetime had distributed
 43 ashrafis among mendicants (fuqara), whose names are given, and paid
 on assessment (muhasiba) 12 ashrafis as tax to shiqqdar (revenue-collector)
 of Raja Bhagwant Das (the Amber ruler and presumably the current
jagirddr), & 1 ashrafi & 4 rupees to a debtor (qarzdar). According to terms
 of his will 14 ashrafis & 22 mans of wheat were spent by Madho (q.v.) s/o
 Kawal Nain on funeral feast among mendicants, leaving a balance of 20
 ashrafis for brother & heir, Haridas, which Madho now paid to the latter
 (Madho s statement before Qazi of Mathura, ah 987: IVS 215).

NARAYAN BHATT
1658 His kunj at Arith/Radhakund mentioned in a bilingual sale-deed as
bordering the plot sold on the north (IVS, 217).
   It is possible that here we have the author of the Vraja-bhakti-vilasa,
who, according to Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir (1882), Delhi,
1979, p. 89, belonged to Sri-kund, i.e. Radhakund, though the date
assigned to him by Growse, viz,, ad 1553, seems impossibly early

NITANAND DAS / NITYANANDj Gosa in, adhikari of Gobind-Dev
temple.
Fourth in the line of Rup Gosa’in, & successor of Gobind Das (q.v.)
(Statement, c.1723: CU). It is possible that he was a younger brother of
Gobind Das (see entry under SHIV RAM).
   1640 Bought land for Rs.6 from Virajvasi’ (Brajbasi) villagers in
Vrindavan (vs 1697: W.8).
   1641-2 Bought land (in Vrindavan) for Rs. 10. Designated: 'adhikari
of Gobind-Devji temple* (NAI-2691/2. Not seen: based on NAI report).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosd’ins                245

   1643 ‘Gusal Nityana(n)d’, along with his son & successor,
Radhakrisandas Chakravarti (q.v.), petitioned Raja Jai Singh of Amber
against Kasi Ram (Kashi Ram. q.v.), whose mother was squatting on part
of land of imperial grant [originally conferred on Govinddev temple, later
transferred to Mirza Raja Jai Singh] (H., pp. 125-6, 379, of vs 1700).

PARAMANAND, Bairagl.
1676 He & Braj Kunwar (q.v,), residents of vill. Radhakund, complained
to Mubariz Khan about some people interfering with their land & garden
at Radhakund (19 Aur.: RD).

PARSOTAM MISR
1579 Received one ashrafi from Narayan (q.v.) s/o Lakhya (ah 987: IVS
125).

RADHA BINOD
See RADHA VINOD DAS.

RADHA-KISHAN DAS CHAKRAVARTI, s/o NITANAND.
Fifth in line of Rup Gosa’in, son & successor ofNitanand (q.v.) (Statement,
c.1723: CU; & hiba deed of Seo Ram (SHIV RAM), ah 1100/ad 1689:
GD).
   1643 Raja Jai Singh, having appointed Radha-Kishan Das Chakravarti
to conduct worship at the devala of Gobind-dev Jiu, Brindaban, directed
that Kashi Ram (q.v.) be prevented from contesting his position &
interfering with his office (A^zam Khan’s parwdna, ah 1053: NAI-2671/8).
Subsequent to this, he, with [his father] Gusai Nityanand (Nitanand),
petitioned Raja Jai Singh of Amber that Kashi Rams mother was squatting
on the temples grant-land, now held by the Raja, whereupon the Raja
issued aparwdna to his officials that A‘zam Khans officers (mutasadya') be
asked to evict her (H., pp. 125-6, 379, of vs 1700).
   Note: Radha-Kishan Das apparently also established a kunj at Arith,
which bore his name, and as such formed part of property at that vill.
which Gobind Charan (q.v.) gifted to Jagannath (q.v.) in 1710 (GD, of
ah 1121, 3 Bah.)

RADHA-KISHAN / RADHA-KISHAN DAS, Syamanand!.
1692 On a plot of land (near land of Jiv Gosa’in), one Kishor Das’s mother
Champa Bai had built a kunj, with the advice of Radha-Kishan ‘Syaman-
nandi’, which she was now giving to Braj Kunwar (q.v.) by sankalp
(charitable gift) & tamlik (transfer of property). Kishor Das, as his seal
246                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

shows, was an official of Maharaja Bishan Singh of Amber (bil. Parwdna,
35 Aur.: RD).
   Before 1700 The relationship between Radha-Kishan & Braj Kunwar
is touched upon in Gopi Ramans statement, c.1725. After the death of
Syamanand (q.v.), a contemporary of Jiv Gosa’in, his followers continued
to follow the path of obedience to Jiv Gosa ins line; & Radha-Kishan
gave a written letter of submission (inqiyad-ndma). But he deviated from
the path of obedience, & Braj Kunwar (cl 700), one of Jiv Gusa in’s
successors, expelled him from the retreat (kunj) in which Syamanand
had lived. Eventually Gusa’in Kishor Das (q.v.) interceded on his behalf,
&, throwing him at Braj Kunwars feet, got him back into the kunj in
question. (CU; copy, RD).
   1707 Radha-Kishan Das, dead: Kishordas Rajawat (Champa Bai’s
son?), having converted Syamanand’s kunj into a haveli, had given it to
Radha Kishan Syamanandi; now upon his death, he installed Nand Kishor
Syamanandi (q.v.) in that haveli (Bijai Singhs risdla, ah 1119: CU).

RADHA MOHAN, Gusain s/o Kishan (Krishn) Dev s/o Ram Charan.
1710 Purchased kunj at Arith for Rs.60 from Kishan Rai Gusa’in (q.v.).
According to the huliya, Radha Mohan was 55 years of age (ah 1122/4
Bah.: IVS 203, bil.).

RADHA RAMAN DAS
1608 Witnessed codicil to Skt. will of Jiv Gosa’in (BSOAS, XLII (2),
1979, pp. 304, 310, citing VRI ser. 18, acc. 22).

RADHAVINOD DAS, Gusai, s/o Parsottam s/o Jivan (hibanama of
1725, RD).
1723 Nominated as heir by Kunj Das, q.v., his uncle (RD/VRI ser. 18,
acc. 22, cited in BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 310, 320).
   1725 ‘Radhabinod, s/o Parsottam s/o Jivan’ obtained from his uncle,
Kunj Das, his haveli (house) with appurtenances in Vrindavan, by legal gift
(hiba). In huliya in the hibanama (RD), he is described as pockmarked and
of about 37 years of age.
   1729 Had laid claim to half-share in chaudhurdi and zamlndafi of
pargana Shahabad, siiba of Bengal, on account of his father Parsottam
holding this office: now confirmed by a hasbu’l hukm issued by the Wazlr
Qamaruddin Khan (of 11 Muh: VRI, S. No. 51, Acc. No. 4).
   1736 Radhabinod, chela of Kunj Das, dec., petitioned seeking issuance
of an order to zamindars to let him collect revenue from 30 bighas of
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  247

grant in vill. Atas, parg. Sahar. The consequential order stipulates that
payment due should be made by zamindars, but no deduction, on that
account be allowed (mujra) from state revenue. If grant-land had not been
previously demarcated, this should be done now, but only wasteland was
to be transferred, not cultivated land. So no reduction in revenue demand
on this village on this score was to be made, and the grantee was not to be
allowed to obtain cultivated land through collusion with zamindars. (Rai
Nandas letter to Sadanand, 18 Muh: RD).
   c.1741 Land purchased in Vrindavan for Rs.53 + Rs.13 by ‘Gusai
Radhavinod, son of Shri Gusai Kunj Das, of the family (parivar) of Shri Jiv
Gusai, adhikari of Shri Radhamadanmohan [temple]’ (Wright 28). Since
the last digit of the Samvat year 179x is not clear, the doc. can belong to a
whole decade ad 1732-42. Wright prefers 1741 on orthographic grounds.
If so, as time passed Radhavinods pretensions seem to have increased
for him to claim, first, Kunj Das as his father, &, then, Jiv Gosa in as
ancestor; therely attaining, the status of a Brahman, though he, like Kunj
Das, was a Kayasth by birth,

RAGHAV, Purohit.
1608 Witnessed codicil to Skt. will of Jiv Gosa’in (BSOAS, XLII (2),
1979, pp. 304, 310).

RAGHAV DAS
1608 Witnessed codicil to the Skt. will of Jiv Gosa’in (BSOAS, XLII (2),
1979, pp. 304,310).

RAGHUNATH, Brahman, sevak of Braj Sundar temple.
1613 Received grant of 15 bighas in vill. Basahi Buzurg (Basai Buzurg),
parg. Sahar, by farman of Jahangir (8 Jah.: MM).

RAGHUNATH, Gaudiya Brahman, s/o Gobind! s/o Chanda.
1675 His possessions, comprising one house of pucca-brick, timber-
roofed, vill. Brindaban, previously received by him in hiba (gift), along
with Rs.49 in cash, 2 tolas & 7 mashas of gold, 5 tolas of silver, bronze
vessels 15 sers in weight, bonds (tamassukdt) of Rs.200 advanced in loan,
box (buqcha) with cloth (25 thans), were now gifted in hiba, in turn, by him
to his nephew, Sri Krishan, s/o Sri Ram s/o Gobindi, Gaudiya Brahman.
His own age stated in huliya on margin: 65 years. (Hiba-deed, certified by
Qazi, ah 1086: MM).
248                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

RAGHUNATH DAS, Gosa in.
1537-8 His purchase of plots of land in Arith/ Radhakund began from this
year (vs 1595: W.1A), though the reference to ‘rupee’ (rupaiya) in terms
of which the price is stated in the doc. suggests the sale-deed was actually
drawn up much later. The other Braj sale-deeds are of the following years:
 1545 (vs 1602: W.l); 1548 (?) (vs 1605?: W.2), while Raghunaths own
deed of gift to Jiv Gosa in (q.v.) lists 6 plots, allegedly purchased by him
in the following years; ah 953/1546 (2 plots); ah 970/1562 (one plot); ah
985/1570 (3 plots), the total cost, Rs.238. (Doc. of ah 966/1588'. VRI;
copy, MM).
     /5<?4 Made a ‘death-bed’ gift ofall his possessions to the ‘idol worshipped
by Jiva’ (Radha Damodar temple), describing himself as ‘zealous for the
service of Radhakunda’ (extract transcribed & translated, BSOAS, XLII
 (2), 1979, p. 318).
    1588 Gifted by hiba to Jiv Gosa’in (all the?) six plots of land owned by
him in Arith/ Radhakund, along with deeds relating thereto (ah 966:
VRI; copy, MM).
    According to Kishandas’s (q.v.) statement (vs 1694/ad 1637), Raghunath
Gosa in, together with Rup (&) Sanatan, gave all their books (postak-ha),
bills & docs, (tamassuk-hd) & their isthals of Brindaban & Radhakund
to Jiv Gosain (Bit, GD; reproduced: BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate III).
    A statement of zamindars & muqaddams of Arith (vs 1770/ad 1713)
claimed that ‘Jati Raghunath Das Godiya’ came, cut the jungle, settled
here, purchased land from their forebears, &, enlightened by Thakuranljl
(Radha), discovered Radhakund & Krishankund. He gave all his property
& papers to Haridas Gosai (q.v.), adhikdri of Govind-dev, in the line
(pari war) of Radha-Gadadhar (Wright 17). This, of course, contradicts
Kishandas’s statement (above) that Raghunath had gifted all his possessions
to Jiv Gosa in, but is, perhaps, a late tradition designed to bolster the
claims of the line of Rup Gosa in (q.v.) as aginst those of Jiv Gosa in over
properties in Arith (Radhakund).
    It is possible that a kunj of Raghunath Das Gosa in at Arith/Radhakund
is referred to in a doc. of ah 1080/ad 1669, only the second portion of
his name being given. Cf. the omission of the initial name in the Braj text
of Krishan Dass statement of vs 1694/1637 (BSOAS, XLII (2), Plate III
&p. 316).

RAMCHAND GHOSH THAKUR
1713 Previously expelled from Radhakund, along with Swami Mohandas
(q.v.) & others, but now readmitted (vs 1770: Wright 17).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  249

   1716 Again expelled from Radhakund, along with the others previously
named (bil. declaration of vill. headmen, the expulsion mentioned in the
Braj portion only, NAI-2671/21).

RAMDAS VAISHNAV
1608 Required by the codicil to Jiv Gosa’ins will, to collaborate in carrying
out its terms (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp. 303-4, 309-10).

RAM JIVAN Gosa’in s/o Syam s/o Gopal Das s/o Anant s/o Jagjivan
Das, heir of Madho, q.v. \adhikdri, Gopinath temple], Grandson of
Gopal Das (q.v.) [s/o Anand (Anant) Das].
 1719 The grant originally made by Akbar in ah 976/ad 1568-69. of 100
 bighas, now reduced to 76 bighas 2 biswas in vill. Raj pur near Vrindavan,
originally held by Madho, now confirmed in Ram Jivan s name (Parwdna,
 1 Muh: IVS 159).
     1722 Same grant verified as being in his possession (Ray Rayan’s
parwdna, 4 Muh: IVS 191-192).
    1725 Received custody of gift of two kunjs in Brindaban on behalf
of Gopinath temple from Raja Ram sdhukdr (banker), native of Bengal
 (transfer deed, 7 Muh: IVS 205).
    1726 It was during his stewardship of the Gopinath temple that the
 Vazir Qamaruddln Khan issued a parwdna confirming the temple s land­
grants in Vrindavan: 142 bighas by farmdns, &c 100 bighas by parwanas
from officials (IVS 177 & 200).
    Much of the other information about Ram Jivan comes from documents
relating to a dispute with Devakl Nandan Gosa’in. As reconstructed
from IVS 158, 167, 171, & 187, the dispute originated thus: Kanhar
(or Kandhar) Das Kayath (q.v.), sevak of Gopinath, came to Vrindavan,
purchased a plot of waste land adjacent to the ahata (compound) of the
Gopinath temple & built on it a haveli or masonry kunj at the instance of
‘Gusa’in Jiu’ (the then adhikari of the temple). When after residing there
for some time he left for some other place (pardes), he made an offering
of it to the Gopinath temple. Thereafter, when, during Aurangzeb’s
reign, the idol [thakur] was removed to Kaman, the building went into
desrepair, & only a platform remained. Sixty years later [in the late 1720’s
presumably] ‘Gusa’in Jiu [the then custodian of the temple] built the
haveli anew. Some unoccupied land remained between its courtyard & the
road; & Devakl Nandan [Gosa’in] claimed this was his land purchased
from his maternal uncle Lachhl Ram. When Fateh Singh & other panch
asked kim to produce the sale-deed, he said it was with Lachhl Ram.
250                     Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

When the latter came back from the Panjab, he denied having it. But later
he agreed to the falsehood, and in ah 1141/ad 1728-29, Devakl Nandan
took him to Qazi Iftikharu’ddin and obtained the Qazi’s seal on the sale-
deed. When Ram Jivan heard of this, he obtained endorsement from the
panch, zamindars & other inhabitants on a statement to the effect that the
land belonged to the Gopinath temple, & Devakl Nandan s claim upon it
was false (IVS 171 of 21 Muh/1739 & IVS 187 A & B).
    1731 Chandar Sen (q.v.) represented Ram Jivan before Qazi
Iftikharu’ddin, & the qdzi sent a chobdar (mace-bearer) to demand the
sale-deed bearing his seal from Devakl Nandan. The latter pledged himself
to produce this within two weeks (Iqramama, ah 1144: IVS 158, where
Devakl Nandan is described as of the Brahman caste).
    1734 The dispute came again before Qazi Iftikharu’ddin, who enquired
from the panch, zamindars, &: residents, & scrutinised the sanads of Raja
Sawai Jai Singh. He concluded that the open land between the compound
of Gopinath temple and the road belonged to the (adhikaris of) Gopinath
temple, and the deed bearing his own seal obtained by Devakl Nandan was
null & void (Qazis judgement, 16 Muh: IVS 167).
    1739 [Ram Jivan sought] endorsement for the further statement that
Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh entrusted the decision on the dispute to Diwan
Bidyadhar, who sent two horsemen, and they, assembling the faujdar
(thanadar?) of the place, Kishan Chand, & all the panch, found Devakl
Nandan s claims to be false, & ruled that Gusain Ram Jivan should receive
a sanad from the Diwani (21 Muh: IVS 171).
    IVS 187, which is undated, is a document issued by an unnamed
‘adhikari of the Gopinath temple’, seeking public endorsement for the
complaint that Jodharam, brother of Devakl Nandan, presuming upon his
being in service of Kunwar Suraj Mai [the Jat chief], broke the lock of the
haveli, took away all goods in it, & pulled it down.
    Undated: A zamindar, Raghu Dev, chaudhuri of pargana Mahmud
Shah! [sarkdr Mahmudabad,] in Bengal had made in writing a grant of
vill. Sarmast Diya in that pargana to the Gopinath temple at Brindaban;
yet the zamindars men did not allow the temples agent (gumasbta) access
to the vill. A local official, addressed as ‘Rai Sahab’, is requested to direct
the zamindars to follow past practice & not meddle with the temple
agents proceedings. Favour for ‘Ram Jivan Gosal, adhikari of the temple
 [Gopinath]’ is also solicited. (Letter to ‘Rai Sahab’ from X: IVS 152).

RAM KISHAN, Gusa in.
1739 The adhikar (management) of Madan Mohan temple was now
entrusted to him (Sawai Jai Singh’s parwana, 22 Muh: MM).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosd’ins                251

RAM KISHOR, disciple (sikhaya) of Goswami Krishna Charan (q.v.)
[who was] a disciple of Goswami Subaldas (q.v.).
1743 Described as adhikarii of the Madan Mohan temple, he lent Rs. 132
to four jimidars (zamindars') of Vrindavan repayable with interest, for
which land near the garden of Madan Mohan temple was to be held in
mortgage, vs 1800 (Wright 31). Some time later, the amount being not
repaid, the land stood transferred to the lender, Ram Kishor (Wright 32,
undated).
   1755 Buys two plots of waste land in the quarter (mahalla) of Mandvi
Rani, Mathura, for Rs.94 as.4 (MM 51A dated 1 Safar 1169 & MM 65A
dated 21 Safar 1169).
   1756 Buys one small plot of land in quarter of Mandvi Ram, Mathura,
for Rs.ll (MM 53, dated 14 Safar 1170). In this doc. he is designated ‘s/o
Kishan Chand [slip for Kishan Charan?] s/o Subaldas’!

RAM SARAN, Gosa’in and Mahant, s/o Jagannath (q.v.) (adopted) s/o
Gobind Charan (q.v.)
1732 Ram Saran (lineage as given above) buys land, 79 gaz square, unbuilt
with some brick work (‘amla-i khisht) in Mathura, for Rs.90 from Ms
Dayali and her two daughters-in-law, all apparently widows, with Ram
Saran being represented before the Qazi by his brother KASHI RAM
(age: 51 years, according to huliya) (GD). Ghasi, naddaf (cotton carder),
s/o Taj s/o ‘Alam, appears as the first of the two sureties on behalf of the
widows before the qdzi.
   1733 Buys 6 bighas of untilled land in nagla Nagu, vill. Brindaban, for
Rs. 120, his vakil before the qdzi being his brother Kashi Ram, whose age
now put at 50 years (NAI-2691/14, of ah 1146/16 Muh).
   7736‘GosvamI Ram Sharan-jf purchased 945 square gaz of land at rate
of 3 square gaz per rupee, so for a total price of Rs.315, the land lying
within the kunj of Surati Ram and Rajavai, the sellers, with BRAJ LAL
as witness (Wright 27, dated 17 June (1736). The locality was presumably
Vrindavan.
   1739 Rai Udai Singh, official of Emperor Muhammad Shah, made
an annual grant to Ram Saran of 500 mans of salt from the salt beds of
Sambhar, in recognition of the fact that ‘he attends to the feeding of
Hindus and Muslims and devotes himself wholly to the worship of God’
(Rai Udai Singh’s parwdna of 22 Muh., NAI-2671/23).
   1740 Described as ‘adhikdri of Shri Govinddevji’, & as such entitled to
4 annas on every thousand rupees of Government revenue, while to the
deity (Thakur) a rupee would be offered as bhet (Sawai Jai Singh’s order,
252                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

vs 1797: H., pp. 263-5, & Plate [p. 413]). Apparently, Ram Saran had
by now succeeded Har Kishan (q.v.), who in 1725 had received in gift the
entire property of Ram Saran s father, Jagannath (q.v.), who had anointed
him (rather than Ram Saran) as his successor as custodian or adhikari of
the Govinddev temple.
   1741 (1) Buys 214 bighas of land near the garden (bagh) of Govind-dev
for Rs.735 from heirs of Jagannath Mali. Deed names as witnesses three
‘mukadams’ of Nagara Nagu, two of Nagara Gupa and two of Bindaban,
vs 1798/10 Sept. 1741 (Wright 29).
   (2) Buys from three Khandelwal Banyas 13 biswas of land, boundaries
as defined in a previous deed (read mafak, not mdfka, so not tax-free as
supposed by Wright). Same mukadams appear as witnesses, though the
lower portion of text is damaged. (Wright 30, of 20 Sept. 1741).
   1745 Buys one bigha pucca (paki) of land for Rs.250. Witnesses include
three 'mukadams1 of Nagara Nagu and three of Nagara Gopa. (Wright 33,
of 25 April 1745).
   1746 Buys 61-/ bighas of land from seven jimidars of Nagara Nagu,
belonging to Bindaban for Rs.72, with additional sale of 5 biswas for Rs.6
made in 1748. (Wright 34 of 12 January 1746, postscript, July 1748).
   1760 Received in gift from Bishan Kunwar, wife of Bangall Rai,
a mahdjan (banker) of the Agrawala sept, resident of Shahjahanabad
(Delhi), a haveli made of baked brick and red sandstone, with wooden
roof, alongside numerous trees & one pucca well in the Kunj mohalla of
Brindaban (copy, NAI-2671/26, original deed being dated ah 1174).
   Note: He is in two documents described as disciple (sikhaya) of
Gosawmi Jagannath (q.v.), in turn called the disciple of Goswami Gobind
Charan (q.v.) (Wright 30 and 34), possibly hinting thereby that he might
not have been a real son of Jagannath.

RAY NARAYAN DAS MISRA s/o Darakh Mai.
1600 Received in gift by hiba a devala (temple) in nagla Gopa [vill. Dosaich,
Vrindavan] from Gopinath s/o Odhu s/o Madho, wine-seller (bad-farosh),
Nirankali (ah 1009: IVS 216).

RUP Gosa’in, adhikari of Govind-dev temple.
‘Rup & Haridas (q.v.), by name, preceptors of the preceptor of Swami
Brajanand, (q.v.), having renounced the world at the time when the
village of Brindaban in the said pargana (Mathura) was full of jungle
& uninhabited, established their residence here. They instituted the
headship & custom of the mendicants (juqraydn) of their sect, so that
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                 253

becoming recluses, they would not touch (wordly) desire & would engage
themselves in the worship of Divinity (Samdiyat) & in undertaking
pilgrimages (sayahat) in Braj Bhum. They pursue mendicancy (gadai) &
take residence in Braj Bhum alone, & entertain mendicants, Hindu &
Muslim, who come to them hungry’ (Mukhtar Khans parwana, 48 Aur/
ad 1704: GD). Rup Gosain is designated adhikari of Govind-dev temple
in Jai Singh’s parwana of ah 1069/ad 1659 (GD), where Jiv Gosa in (q.v.)
is said to have been his sevak.
    1568 By this year Rup Gusa’in had entrusted the adhikar of the devalas
of Madan Mohan & Gobind-dev temples to Jiv Gusa’in, as stated in
Akbar s farman of ah 976 (VRI). The tense (dada ast) suggests, but does
not establish, that Rup was alive when the farman was issued.
    Krishan Das (q.v.) in vs 1694/1637 stated in a bil. document that Rup,
Sanatan & Raghunath Gosa in had given all their books (postak-ha), bills
& documents (tamassuk-ha), &c isthals at Vrindavan & Radhakund to Jiv
Gosa in (BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, Plate III & p. 316).
    In 1705, his samadhi was pointed out in a part of Raja Jai Singh’s garden
(at Vrindavan), then under occupation of Kishan Priya (q.v.), widow of
Braj Kunwar, of the line of Jiv Gosa’in (49 Aur: GD).
    Rup was succeeded as adhikari of Govind-dev temple by Haridas (q.v.).

RUP KABIRAJ Bairagi.
1711 He had lived at the [Radha] Kund isthal (Arith) of Gobind-Dev,
& then having stolen the pothi (book, accounts book) & other goods,
had fled away. Now some of his sikhs (disciples) wished to reinstall him
there. Anup Singh [local official from Amber] was ordered not to let him
stay ‘in Braj’ without Jagannath’s (q.v.) permission (Raja Bijai Singh’s bil.
parwana, in response to Jagannath’s complaint, ah 1123: GD). In the Braj
version the name appears as Rup Kabraj Bairagi.
   1713 Previously expelled, along with Ram Chand Ghosh Thakur (q.v),
Swami Mohan Das (q.v.), etc., from Radhakund, & now, with them,
readmitted by vill. headmen (Wright 17).
   1716 Expelled again by the headmen from Arith/ Radhakund, along
with the same persons as were readmitted in 1713. The expulsion was
apparently at the behest of Gusa’in Jagannath whose authority the
headmen here expressly acknowledge (see under MOHANDAS). (NAI-
2671/21 of 5 Far./vs 1773, bil. doc.).

samAnand
See SYAMANAND
254                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

SANATAN Gosa’in.
Brother of Rup Gosa in (q.v.) & founder of Madan Mohan temple (BSOAS,
XLII (2), 1979, p. 317), his name occurs very rarely in our records. Since
it is Rup alone who is represented as transferring the adhikdr of Madan
Mohan &. Govind-dev temples to Jiv (see under RUP Gosa in), it may be
inferred that Sanatan had earlier transferred his rights & possessions to
Rup, who then transferred them to Jiv Gosa’in.

SEO RAM
See SHIV RAM

SHANKAR
1629 Mentioned as sevak of ‘Thakurduara Gobind-dev Jiu’, who was to
receive arrears of cash grants from officials of Raja Jai Singh (the Raja’s
parwdna, ah 1039: GD).

SHIV RAM / SEO RAM, Brahma Murat, Gosain, s/o Radha Kishan
Das (q.v.) s/o Nitanand Das (q.v.), adhikdri of Govind-dev temple.
Note: In GD of 32 Aur. (ah 1100 = ad 1689), where the lineage is given,
 it is stated that Kishan Charan (q.v.) was his ‘brothers son’ (birddar-
zadd), but this is belied by the fact that the name of Kishan Charan s
grandfather is given as Gobind Das, while his own father’s name is stated
to be Radhakishan Das. Perhaps, what was intended to be written was just
birddar and that too in the extended sense of cousin, which, in turn, would
only be possible if Gobind Das and Nitanand Das had been brothers, for
which there is otherwise no explicit statement.
    Sixth in line of Rup Gosa in, & successor of Radha Krishan (Das), q.v.
(statement of c.1723: CU).
    His name is spelt in Braj docs, as Shiv Ram, Se Ram, Seo Ram Das,
Saiv Rama, Saiva Rama (see W.9, 11-15) and even Sauva Ram in Nagari
characters (H. p. 136, of ah 1078)..
    1648 Witnessed (‘sakshl Gosai Shiv Ram’) a deed of purchase of land in
Haidu, Vrindavan, by Bhalya Bhagawat-das (vs 1705: W.9).
    1652 Seo Ram, ‘Pujdrl of devala Gobind’, to be assisted, as desired by
Rao Kalyan Singh. He had complained that a Brahman, Har Gobind,
had committed theft in the temple &, then, when the offence was proved
against him, had committed suicide. ‘Inayat Khan was directed to evict
the Brahman’s men from the temple. (Khalllullah Khan’s parwdna, 26
Sha.: GD).
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                  255

    1653 (1) Purchased land for Rs. 17 in nagla Nagu (Vrindavan), styled
adhikari of Gobindji in the Persian version (bil. vs 1709/ah 1063: Will
& GD).
    1654 (1) Purchased land in nagla Gopa, Vrindavan, for Rs.40. Styled
adhikari, etc., in Persian version (bil., vs 1711/ah 1064: W.12 & GD).
    (2) Another plot purchased by him for Rs.57 in nagla Nagu, under
designation of 'adhikari of Gobind-dev Jiu’ (NAI-2691/6, bil., date vs
1711 given in Nagari text on reverse).
    1659 (1) Assured by Raja Jai Singh that as sevak of Gobind-Dev, the
management of its land & retreats (kunj-ha) would now be entirely vested
in him, despite Kishan Dass (q.v.) machinations (bil. parwdna of Raja Jai
Singh, ah 1069. GD). (2) Purchased land in nagar Nagu (Vrindavan) for
Rs.18 (vs 1716: W.13).
    1662 Purchased land for Rs.50, same locality (vs 1719: W.14).
    1667 (1) Purchased land for Rs.24 in nagar Gopa (Vrindavan) (vs 1724:
W.15). (2) A cash grant (rozind) of Re.l per diem, in sum Rs.360 per
annum, was continued ‘as hitherto’ in favour of Shiv Ram as adhikari [of
Govind-dev], along with an annual grant, also continued, of Rs.600 for
clothes, etc., of the twin deities of the temple (Parwdna of Raja Ram
Singh of Amber: H., pp. 136, 141, of ah 1078).
    1669 Paid Rs.40 for materials Narnia) of house of Bihari, son of Gordhan,
of Nirankali community (qaum), (dec.), who had built his residence out of
brick, mud & wood on Seo Ram’s land, with his permission; Isarwi, the
daughter of the deceased, accepted the payment in full settlement (Isarwis
statement before Qazi ‘Abdu’l Hai, ah 1079: GD). Seo Ram is described
in Isarwi’s statement as ‘Bangali sevak of Govbind-dev.*
    1671 Seo Ram (Braj: Sev Ram) had brought the idols of the Govind-
dev temple to Kaman, where he now received instructions from Maharaja
Ram Singh of Amber dated 15 Jumada II 1082/19 October 1671 to
remove the idols to Bhatesar (NA1-2671/12— a bilingual document). See
also R. Nath, ‘Sri Govindadeva’s itinerary from Vrindavana to Jayapura,
c. 1534-1727’, in Margaret H. Case ed., Govindadeva: a Dialogue in Stone,
New Delhi, 1996, pp. 168-169.
    1675 Having returned from Kaman, brought suit before the qazi of
Mathura against Arjun, tenant of his house (haveli) [in Mathura], who
had earlier been paying half a rupee in monthly rent. When the Keshav
RM temple (dehrd) was destroyed, Seo Ram had fled to Kaman Pahari.
Now that he returned, Arjun refused to pay the rent & claimed to be
owner of the house. A number of persons of the locality, including a
woman Ganga Dasi, were examined by the qdzi near the disputed house,
256                   Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

& judgement was delivered in Seo Rams favour, Arjun being required to
surrender the haveli to him (NAI-2671/13 of ah 1085).
   1689 Gifted by hiba one haveli & two shops in Mathura to his ‘brother’s
son’, Kishan Charan (q.v.) s/o Raghunath s/o Gobind Das. Gives names
of his own father (Radha Kishan Das) & grandfather (Nitanand) (ah
1100: GD).
   1690. Not he, but Kishan Charan, is styled adhikari of Govind-dev
temple, & so receives the cash-grant (rozina) of Rs.360 per annum from
Amber (H, p. 172 of ah 1102). So Shiv Ram was now probably dead.
   1692 By now dead. Parwana addressed to officials of Baitu’l Mai,
Mathura, says his heir Kishan Charan s possession of one haveli & two
shops in Mathura is not to be disturbed (36 Aur.: CU).

SHYAMANAND
See SYAMANAND

SRI CHAND, sevak of Madan Mohan temple.
1613 Presented before Emperor Jahangir, as holder of Todar Mai’s grant
[made as Jagirddr] of tax-free land, in succession to Gopal Das, q.v.
(originally 100 bighas ‘by bamboo rod’, now computed at 89 bighas 9 biswas
ilahi, after change of measures) in vill. Rajpur [near Vrindavan], parg.
Mathura. It was now converted into an imperial grant by Jahangirfarman
(8 Jah., RK; copies, RK & MM).
   1629 Chaknama (bil.) of above grant, showing Sri Chand to be alive
(ah 1038: RK/MM).
   1632 Now dead, & grant conferred on his ‘heir’, Gosa’in Das (q.v.) by
Shahjahans farman (5 Sha.: MM),

SUBAL DAS, Gosa’in s/o Jairamdas s/o Gosaindas.
1711 Described as s/o Jairamdas s/o Gosaindas (q.v.); received from
his cousin, Kishor Das (q.v.), all his properties and assets in Brindaban,
Radhakund, Bathain, Hodal, etc. His age recorded in huliya: 47 years
(gift-deed, ah 1123/5 Bah.: MM 81).
   1722 (1) Received in pun-arth (property-donation) a plot of 4 bighas
from eight named zamindars belonging to four families of Arith, in his
capactly as adhikari of Madan Mohan (hiba-nama, 4 Muh: MM 82).
   (2) Purchased plots of land in vill. Sakitra, parg. Mugara (Mangotla) (4
Muh.: MM 82; & Braj sale-deed, vs 1779: Wright 20). In the Braj text
his name is given as Gosa’in Subalanand.
   1723 Obtained a parwana from Raja Gujarmal, who then held the area
                  A Documentary History of the Gosains                   257

in jagir, affirming that ‘the servants’ of Madan Mohan temple held 172
bighas, 9 biswas in two plots in madad-i ma'ash in vill. Raj pur, pargana
Mathura, by imperial farmans and directing that the zamindars concerned
be induced to pay the revenue (mahsul) from that land in full to Gosa’in
Subal Das, etc., adhikdris of the temple (Copy: Vrindavan 145).
    1724 For settling the dispute between Gosain Jagannath (q.v.) and
Nand Kishor Sayamanandi (q.v.), Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh nominated
two Gosa’ins, Syam Charan (q.v.) & Subal (presumably Subal Das) along
with Jagannath to settle the matter. But ‘Subal Jiu’ being then at Karauli
 [in sarkdr Kanauj] was not available (Sawai Jai Singhs parwdna, 6 Muh.:
GD).
    Before 1726-7 Writes letter to ‘Inayatullah Khan (d. 1726-27), minister
at Mughal court, seeking confirmation of farmans of Akbar and Jahangir’
in respect of grant of 89 bighas, 9 biswas, in pargana Mathura [vill. Rajpur],
describing himself as 'sevak of Thakur devala Sri Madan Mohan Jiu.
Pleads that ‘whatever favour is shown in respect of the temple (devala)
comes, after all, from Gad, jazdk Allah (Arabic: ‘May God reward thee!’)
 (CU: photocopy No. 167).

SUNDAR DAS, Gosain. s/o Harnath, Brahman.
Parentage & caste given in sale-deed of his son, Bansidhar (ah 1103/ad
1691: GD).
   1648 Witnessed deed of purchase of land in Vrindavan by Bhaiya
Bhagavat Das (‘sdchhi Gunsain Sundar Das’) (vs 1705: W.9).

SWAMIdAS s/o Kishandas, Brahman.
1613 Received grant of 20 bighas ilahi in parg. Gankar, sarkdr Udambar
(Tanda, Bengal), the zimn of the farmdn designating him Brahman,
resident of vill. Jogner, parg. Gankar (8 Jah./AH 1022: MM). Note: For
pargana Gankar see Irfan Habib, Atlas of the Mughal Empire, Sheet 11 A,
24+, 88+.

SYAMANAND / SAMANAND Bairagi, Udiya.
‘Samanand, Udiya, Gaudiya servant’, resident of suba Orissa, arrived from
that province in the reign of Jahangir (1605-27), & took up residence
near Jiv Gosa’in (statement on behalf of Jagannath, q.v., 1723: GD).
‘Syamanand Bairagi, murid (disciple) of Jiv Gusa’in, always devoted
himself to service & worship of the said Gusa’in, & lived in one of the
twelve self-owned & hereditary retreats (kunj) of the said Gusa’in in the
vill. (Brindaban), outside the door of the principal kunj*. (Gopi Ramans
258                    Braj Bhum in Mughal Times

statement, c. 1725: CU; copy RD). According to another statement, of
c. 1723, he was a ‘Gaudiya servant’ of Jiv Gosa’in, in whose custody a plot
close to where Jiv lived was placed. ‘He kept watch, (looked after) trees &
swept the floor’ (statement in support of Jagannath: CU).
    For the dispute over Syamanand’s kunj & garden in Vrindavan in the
first quarter of the 18th century, see under GOBIND CHARAN, BRAJ
JANANAND, & NAND KISHOR.
    The traditional date of Syamanand’s death is 1630 (Sukumar Sen,
History ofBengali Literature, New Delhi, 1960, p. 101).
    For the line of his successors, viz., Alkanand, Radhanand, Nitanand,
Braj Jananand (q.v.), & Alcharanand (?), see statement made on behalf of
Gopi Raman (q.v.) (c. 1723: CU).

SYAM CHARAN s/o Jairamdas s/o Anand Das, adopted s/o Gopal Das
s/o Anand Das.
 1696 Received in gift (tamlity from his uncle, Gopal Das (q.v.) s/o Anand
Das s/o Jagjivan Das all his residential land, built & unbuilt, houses
 (havelihd), shops, gardens, retreats (kunj-ha), cash & kind (ah 1107: IVS
 176). One presumes the gift implied that Gopal Das had nominated Syam
Charan to succeed him in the office of Chief Priest, Gopinath temple.
    1724 (1) Appointed by Maharaja Jai Singh as a mediator, along with
Gosa’in Subal [Das] (q.v.) to settle dispute between Gosa’in Jagannath
(q.v.) & Nand Kishor Syamanandi (q.v.) (GD, of 6 Muh.)
    (2) Parwdna issued by Mir Jumla Mu‘azzam Khan, on a petition by
wakil of Syam Charan s/o Gopal s/o Anant Chain (?) s/o Nitanand s/o
Madsudan, recalling Akbar s grant of 142 bighas to Gopinath (confusing the
temple with a person) in vill. Bindaban, passing thereafter to Madsudan
(confusion with Madho, q.v?), and confirming Syam Charan’s possession
thereof as rightful heir (IVS 155A & B, dated 13 Rabi‘ II ry. 7 Muh./30
Dec. 1724).
    1725 His [inherited] madad-i ma’ash grant of 102 bighas 10 biswas
granted (confirmed?) by farmdn in ah 1043/ad 1633, now demarcated in
two blocks: (a) Bindraban Khas: 40 bighas, and (b) Nagla Nagu & Gopa,
3 plots: 62 bighas, 10 biswas (Chaknama, ah 1137/7 Muh.: copy, IVS 207
& 213; another copy, IVS 218).

SYAM DAS s/o Ojhanand s/o Nitanand.
1723 Appeared before the Qdzi of Mathura as wakil of Nand Kishor
(q.v.). On the judgement being given against his principal, agreed to have
the disputed garden vacated & the big gate closed (ah 1136; GD, copy:
                  A Documentary History of the Gosa’ins                 259

Jaipur). He then left Vrindavan in company with Nand Kishor (copy of
statement for public endorsement, n.d., GD).

SYAM KRISHAN.
1615 Received grant of 15 bighas ilahi in vill. Basahi (Basai) Buzurg (parg.
Sahar), of which he was resident, by Jahangir s farman (10 Jah.: MM).

VILASADASA
See BILASDAS

VISHNU VICHITR
1594 Witnessed purchase of land in Vrindavan by Haridas (q.v.) (sakhi
Vishnuvichitr) (vs 1651: W.6).
   1608 Witnessed codicil to will of Jiv Gosa’in (RD: BSOAS, XLIII, (2),
1979, pp. 304, 310).

VRIMDAVANADASA
See BINDRABAN DAS
                            Appendix



NOTE ON SUCCESSION CUSTOMS IN THE CHAITANYA SECT OF
VRINDAVAN: THE LINE OF RUP GOSA’IN

The Chaitanya sect at Vrindavan mainly revolved around the rituals and
temples established by the brothers Rup and Sanatan and their nephew Jiv
Gosa’in. All three led celibate lives and left behind no children. Rup seems
to have held the office of chief priest of the Govind-dev temple, whose
duties were subsequently exercised by Haridas, who was an associate of Jiv
Gosa in. There is no direct indication that his two successors Gobind Das
and Nitanand Das were related to him. That the latter two were brothers is
inferred from a later reference to the kinship existing between Shiv Ram,
grandson of Nitanand Das, and Kishan Charan, grandson of Gobind Das.
The succession now passed from Nitanand to his son Radhakishandas
Chakravarti and then to his grandson Shiv Ram, the father-to-son norm
being followed.
   But Shiv Ram’s choice of successor fell on Kishan Charan, the
grandson of Gobind Das. Kishan Charan chose not his son, Har Kishan,
but his brother Gobind Charan, who in turn chose his cousin Jagannath
as his successor. During this period Shiv Ram’s grandson Brajanand
became a prominent figure in the Govind-dev establishment, but he was
not destined to occupy the head priests office; Jagannath’s successor, as
chosen by him, was a less distant relative, Har Kishan, son of Kishan
Charan. In apparently a return favour, Har Kishan seems to have chosen
as his successor, Ram Saran, son of Jagannath.
   The family tree of the Gosa ins of Rup s line from Gobind Das onwards,
as established from our documents, is reproduced below. The numbers in
brackets precede the names of those who succeeded to the office of high
priest of the Govind-dev temple after Haridas, and indicate their relative
positions in the order of succession. They all belong to the same family,
but a direct father-to-son succession occurs only twice out of nine cases of
                                    Appendix                                 261

succession after Gobind Das entered upon the priestly office. The period
during which a person is shown by our documents to have been alive is
indicated within brackets after his name. As noted above, it is probable,
but not certain, that (3) and (4) were sons of (2).

                                     (2) Haridas
                                    (1593-1611)


        (3) Gobind Das                                       (4) Nitanand Das
                                                                 (1640-43)


Chakravarti Raghunath              Ram Bhadr                 (5) Radha Kishandas
                                                              Chakravarti (1643)



                                                               (6) Shiv Ram
                                                                 (1648-89)
(7) Kishan Charan       (8) Gobind Charan    (9) Jagannath
    (1689-96)               (1695-1710)        (1710-29)
                                                                  Gobind


(10) Har Kishan         (11) Ram Saran        Kashi Ram
                                                                 Brajanand
     (1725)                (1732-60)          (1732-33)
                                                                 (1704-34)
                            Bibliography




The list below is arranged alphabetically according to names of authors.
Surnames come first only in the case of European and modern Indian
authors. The list is restricted to works and texts cited in this volume.
   The collections whose holdings were explored and photographed by
Dr Tarapada Mukherjee and the holdings of the National Archives of
India relating to Vrindavan and Braj Bhum, already described in the
Introduction, are not included in the Bibliography.
   The following abbreviations have been employed in the Bibliography:

Bib. Ind.    Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta
Bodl.        Bodleian Library, Oxford
Br. Lib.      British Library (previously the holdings of British Museum)
BSOAS         Bulletin ofthe School of Oriental and African Studies, London
IESHR         Indian Economic and Social History Review, Delhi
JRAS         Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London
JUPHS        Journal of the UP Historical Society, Lucknow
PIHC          Proceedings of the Indian History Congress (owing to the
              shifting places of publication in India, volumes are referred
              to by the sites and years of annual sessions).
SIPH          Studies in Peoples History, New Delhi

‘Abdul Hamid Lahori, Padshahnama, ed. Kabir Al-Din Ahmad, Abd
     Al-Rahim, and W.N. Lees, 2 vols. (vol. I in 2 parts), Bib. Ind.,
     Calcutta, 1866-72.
‘Abdu’l Qadir Badauni, Muntakhabut Tawdrikh, ed. Ali Ahmad and W.N.
     Lees, 3 vols., Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1873-87.
 Abu 1 Fazl, A'in-i Akbari, ed. H. Blochmann, 2 vols., Bib. Ind., Calcutta,
      1867-77. The text and tables have been checked with Br. Lib. MSS
     Add. 7652 and Add. 6552.
264                             Bibliography

Abu 1 Fazl, Akbamdma, ed. Agha Ahmad Ali and Abdu-r Rahim, 3 vols.,
      Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1873-86.
Ali, M. Athar, The Apparatus ofEmpire: Awards of Ranks, Offices and Titles
      to the Mughal Nobility (1574-1658), Delhi, 1985.
‘All Muhammad Khan, Mirat-i Ahmadi, ed. Nawab Ali, 2 vols. and
      Supplement, Baroda, 1927-78 and 1930.
Amin Qazwini, Padshahndma, Br. Lib. MS Or. 173.
Anonymous, A Gazetteer of Delhi (1883-4), Lahore, 1884,
Anonymous, Collection of Miscellaneous Papers including pargana-wise
     jamddaml of Mughal provinces of Bihar, Allahabad, Awadh, Agra,
      Delhi, Lahore, Ajmer, and Gujarat, c 1690 (date established from
      internal evidence), text so bound as to run from left to right, from f.
      100b to f. 73a. Br. Lib. MS Add. 6586. Copy (Rotograph No. 203)
      in Library of Department of History, AMU, Aligarh.
Anstey, Vera, The Economic Development of India, 4th ed., London,
      1952,
‘Bahar’. See: Tek Chand ‘Bahar’.
Bahura, G.N., and Chandramani Singh, Catalogue ofHistorical Documents
      in Kapad Dwara, Jaipur, Jaipur, 1988.
Banarasidas, Ardhakathanak, text printed in Mukund Lath, Haifa Tale,
     Jaipur, 1981, pp. 223-75.
Bayazid Bayat, Tazkira-i Humayun o Akbar, ed. M. Hidayat Hosain, Bib.
     Ind., Calcutta, 1941.
Bernier, Francois, Travels in the Mogul Empire, 1656-8, tr. A. Constable,
     revised V.A. Smith, London, 1916.
Bhimsen, Nuskha-i Dilkushd, Br. Lib. MS Or. 23.
Case, Margaret H., ed., Govindadeva: a Dialogue in Stone, New Delhi,
      1996. Place-names and personal names are often perversely spelt in
     this volume, apparently through editorial intervention.
Cattenoz, H.G., Tables de Concordance des Ires Chretienne et Hegirienne,
     Paris, 1954.
Crooke, William, The North-Western Provinces of India, London, 1897.
      [‘North Western Provinces’ was the previous name of the United
     Provinces, now Uttar Pradesh].
Crooke, William, A Rural and Agricultural Glossary for the N. W. Provinces
     and Oudh, Calcutta, 1888; reprint, New Delhi, 1989.
Crooke, William, Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and
     Oudh, 4 vols. Calcutta, 1896. The reprint, Delhi, 2005, binds the
     four volumes in two, but maintains the original page nos., vol.
     I of reprint containing original vols. I and II, and reprint vol. II
     containing original vols. Ill and IV.
                               Bibliography                            265

Drake-Brockmann, D.L., Muttra: a District Gazetteer (U.P. District
      Gazetteers, vol. VII), Allahabad, 1911.
Dwivedi, Girish Chandra, The Jats: Their Role in the Mughal Empire, New
      Delhi, 1989.
Elliot, Henry M., Memoirs........ofthe Races ofthe North Western Provinces
      of India, ed. John Beames, 2 vols., London, 1865.
Entwistle, A.W., Braj: Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage, Groningen, 1987.
Fallon, S.W., A New Hindustani-English Dictionary, Banaras/London,
       1879; reprint, New Delhi, 2004.
Finch, William, 'Journal’, reprinted from Purchas his Pilgrimes in William
      Foster, ed., Early Travels in India, 1583-1619, London, 1927/
      reprint, New Delhi, 1968, pp. 122-187.
Foster, W., ed., English Factories in India, 1655-60, Oxford, 1921.
Goswamy, B.N., and J.S. Grewal, The Mughals and the Jogis ofJakhbar:
      Some Madad-i Ma‘dsh and Other Documents, Simla, 1967.
Grierson, G.A., Bihar Peasant Life, Calcutta, 1885; reprint, Delhi, 1975.
Grierson, G.A., Linguistic Survey of India, vol. IX (1), 1916, reprint,
      Delhi, 1940.
Growse, F.S., Mathura, a District Memoir, orig. pub. 1882, reprint, New
      Delhi, 1979.
Habib, Irfan, The Agrarian System of Mughal India, 1556-1707, 1st ed.,
      Bombay, 1963; 2nd (revised) ed., Delhi 1999; 3rd ed,, New Delhi,
      2014. (Page references to the 3rd ed. also apply to the 2nd ed.).
Habib, Irfan, ‘Aspects of Agrarian Relations and Economy in a Region
      of Uttar Pradesh during the 16th Century’, IESHR, IV (3), 1967,
      pp. 205-32.
Habib, Irfan, ‘A System of Trimetallism in the Age of the Price Revolution:
      Effects of the Silver Influx on the Mughal Monetary System’, in
      John F. Richards, ed., The Imperial Monetary System of Mughal
      India, Delhi 1987, pp. 137-170.
Habib, Irfan, Atlas of the Mughal Empire, Delhi, 1982.
Hadi Kamwar Khan. See: Muhammad Hadi Kamwar Khan.
Hasan, Aziza, ‘Mints of the Mughal Empire’, PIHC, 29th session (1967,
      Patiala), pp. 314-45.
Hawley, John Stratton, Surdas, Poet, Singer, Saint, revised and enlarged
      ed., Delhi, 2018.
Horstmann, Monica, In Favour of Govinddevji: Historical Documents
      relating to a Deity of Vrindaban and Eastern Rajasthan, New Delhi,
      1999. Pages containing ‘Facsimiles’ at the end of the volume need to
      have numbers marked on them beginning with p. 375. This exercise
266                            Bibliography

      has been carried out in a copy of the book to enable us to cite the
      relevant facsimiles in our references.
Ibbetson, Denzil, Panjab Castes, Lahore, 1916.
I‘timad ‘Ali Khan (Haqq Muhammad), Mir’dtu’l Haqd’iq, MS, Bodl.
      Fraser 134.
Izid Bakhsh ‘Rasa, Riyazu’l Wudad, collection of letters, Br. Lib. MS
      Or, 23.
Jahangir, Tuzuk-i Jahangirl, Persian text, ed. Sayyid Ahmad [Khan],
      Aligarh, 1863-4.
Jhaveri, Krishanlal Mohanlal, ed., Imperial Farmans (ad 1577 to ad 1803),
      granted to the Ancestors of His Holiness the Tikayat Maharaj, Bombay,
      1928.
Khan, Iqtidar Alam, ‘The Nobility under Akbar and the Development of
      his Religious Policy’, JRAS, 1968, pp. 29-36.
Khare, G.H., ed., Persian Sources of Indian History, vol. VI, containing
      extracts from Akhbarat-i Darbar-i Mualla of Aurangzebs reign,
      Poona, 1973.
Mahmud Balkhi, Bahru’l Asrdr, ed. Riazul Islam, Karachi, 1980.
‘Malikzada’, Nigamama-i Munshi (1680), litho. Nawal Kishor, Lucknow,
      1882.
Mirza Khan (Jan?) ibn Fakhruddin Muhammad, Tubfatu’l Hind, MS in
      Department of History A.M.U., Accession No. 67. I regret I have
      not been able to use the edition by Nurul Hasan Ansari, Tehran,
      1968.
Mirza Muhammad, Tarlkh-i Muhammadl, ed. Imtiyaz Ali Arshi, 2 vols.,
      Aligarh, 1960.
Monier-Williams, Monier, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, 2nd ed., Oxford,
      1899.
Moosvi, Shireen, ‘Mughal Administration in Rural Localities’, SIPH, I
      , 2014, pp. 231-36.
      (2)
Moosvi, Shireen, The Economy of the Mughal Empire, c.1595: a Statistical
      Study, 1st ed., Delhi, 1987, second (revised & enlarged) ed., New
      Delhi, 2015.
Moosvi, Shireen, ‘Vrindavan: the Evolution of the Town in Mughal
      Times’, in: The Evolution ofa Nation: Pre-Colonial to Post-Colonial,
      Essays in Memory of R.S. Sharma, ed. D.N. Jha, Delhi, 2014, pp.
      223-33.
Moreland, W.H., ‘The Agricultural Statistics of Akbar’s Empire’, JUPHS,
      Lucknow, II (1), 1922, pp. 1-39.
Muhammad Hadi Kamwar Khan, Tazkiratus Salatin-i Chaghata, ed.
      Muzaffar Alam, Bombay, 1980.
                               Bibliography                            267

Muhammad Kazim, Alamgirndma, ed. Khadim Husain and Abdu’l Hai,
      Bib. Ind., Calcutta, 1865-73.
Mukherjee, Tarapada, and J.C. Wright, ‘An Early Testamentary Document
       in Sanskrit’, BSOAS, XLII (2), 1979, pp, 297-320.
Mundy, Peter, Travels, vol. II, Travels in Asia, ed. Sir R.C. Temple.
      London, 1914.
Murtaza Husain Allahyar Bilgrami, Hadlqatu’l Aqalim, litho. Nawal
      Kishor, Lucknow, 1879.
Nevil, H.R., Bulandshahr: A Gazetteer, (U.P. District Gazetters, vol. V),
      Lucknow, 1922.
Pauvels, Heidi, and Bachrach, Emilia, ‘Aurangzeb as Iconoclast? Vaishnava
      Accounts of the Krishna images’ Exodus from Braj’,/&4S, 3rd series,
      28 (3), pp. 485-508.
Pelsaert, Francisco, Remonstrantie, tr. W.H. Moreland and P. Geyl,
      Jahangirs India: the Remostrantie of Francisco Pelsaert, Cambridge,
       1925.
Platts, John T.,^4 Dictionary of Urdu, Classical Hindi and English, Oxford,
       1884/reprint, New Delhi, 2000.
Rai Chaturman Saksena, Chahar Gulshan or Akhbarul Nawadir,
      completed, 1760, Aligarh: Habibganj Coll. 32/157. (The work
      has now been published: ed. Chandra Shekhar, New Delhi, 2017.
      Unfortunately, the text is not edited critically enough).
Rana, R.P., Rebels to Rulers: The Rise of Jat Power in Medieval India,
      c. 1665-1735, New Delhi, 2006.
Rizqullah Mushtaqi, Wdqidt-i Mushtaqi, ed. I.H. Siddiqui and W.H.
      Siddiqi, Rampur, 2006.
Salih Kanbu, ‘Arnal-i Salih, ed. G. Yazdani, 3 vols., Bib. Ind., Calcutta,
      1912-46.
Saqi Musta‘idd Khan, Ma’dsir-i ‘Alamgyri, ed. Agha Ahmad Ali, Bib.
      Ind., Calcutta, 1870-73.
Sen, Sukumar, History ofBengali Literature, New Delhi, 1960.
Shaikh Farid Bhakkari, Zakhiratul Khawdnin, ed. Syed Moinul Haq, 3
      vols., Karachi, 1961, 1970 & 1974.
Survey of India, Maps on various scales, but especially:
      (1) ‘Quarter Inch’, No. 54E, ‘Muttra* Sheet, 7th ed., 1958
      (2) ‘One Inch’, No. 54E/10, 4th ed., 1960
      (3) ‘One Inch’, No. 54E/6, 2nd ed., 1958
      (4) Guide Map of Mathura, with inset of Vrindavan, on scale of
           1:20,000. Published, 1989
Tek Chand ‘Bahar’, Bahar-i ‘Ajam, litho., Nawal Kishor, Lucknow,
      1336/1916.
                                   Index




Note: In the Index, the abbreviation biog. refers to the biographical notice
of an individual in Chapter 10, where an alphabetically arranged collection
of such notices is provided, largely restricted to Gosa’ins. Where the page
references under biog. are entered in the index, references to the same
individual occurring elsewhere in Chapter 10 are not indicated, since the
notices in that Chapter themselves provide adequate cross references.

‘Abdu’l Hai, qdzi, 225                    Agra, dastilr-circle, 17, 18; crop rates
‘Abdullah, qdzi, 146                         of, 46, 73, 155 & n.
‘Abdullah Khan, Qutbu’l Mulk,             Agra, province (siiba), 16, 41, 114
    Sayyid, central minister, 199, 208,   Agra, sarkar, 15 n., 16 n., 22 n., 41,
    210, 212, 219, 232                       42, 231,232
‘Abdu’l Latif, son of Mukramat Khan,      Agra-Delhi highway, 52-53
    98, 105                               Ahar, zamindars &c retainers in, 22
‘Abdu’n Nabi, Shaikh, Akbar’s sadr        Ahirs, zamindars, 22
     (minister for grants), 60, 63, 98,   Ahlad/Ahalad/Ahaladu/Ahaldar, s/o
    203-04                                   Sakatu/Sahkar, ‘inhabitant’, panch/
‘Abdu’n Nabi, Shaikh, faujdar of             muqaddam, Vrindavan, 143, 145,
    Mathura, 98-99, 106,107-8 & n.           150, 152; a Gaurua, 152
 ‘Abdu’r Rahim Khan-i Khanan, 24, 64      A’in-i Akbari, by Abul Fazl, 17, 21,
     & n., 67, 85                            42,47, 73, 155-56
 ‘Abdu’r Rahim, qazi of Mathura           Akbar, emperor, 2, 5, 26, 28, 64 n.,
     (1572), 62                              93, 94, 142, 145, 181, 195, 223;
 Abul Fazl, 16, 26,41,47, 62, 80, 111        grants to temples & priests, 57-
 Abu Sa'id, ‘dmil & amin of Princess         90, 91-92, 102, 103, 110, 185-
     Imtiyaz Mahal, 210, 212, 236            86,202, 222-23,233, 236; &
 Adhara s/o Mugasa, panch, vill. Arith,      execution of Brahman of Mathura,
     139-41, 162                             63; prohibits killing of peacocks in
  Afzal Khan, jagirdar of Mathura, 98        some parganas, 64; forged farmdns
 Agra, city, 32, 52, 94, 231; life of        of, 89-90; escheat under, 123
     workman at, 36                       Akbarabad. See Agra
270                                   Index

 Akrur or Akraur, temple, 67, 68, 82,      Aurangzeb, Mughal emperor, 4, 21,
    99-100                                    34, 36, 38, 169, 249; Braj region
 Aligarh Muslim University, 3, 110            under 109-125; his general order
 ‘All Khan, chaudhuri, thdkur of Sei,         resuming grants conferred on
    21, 38, 134, 143, 150, 151                Hindus, 113-14; orders demolition
 ‘All Khan s/o Angad, Gaurua,                 of Keshav Rai temple, 111; grants
    Vrindavan, 20-21, 37, 39, & n,,           to Vrindavan temples maintained
     118, 152, 157, 158                       under, 112-13; order on escheat,
 ‘All Khan, peasant, of Gaurua Jadon          123
    caste, Radhakund, 118, 174, 175        Ayaldas, representative of Haridasis,
 ‘All Naqi Khan ‘Rasikh’, 214, 221,           116
    257                                    Aya Mai, Raja, minister at court, 243
 Allah Vardl Khan, jagirddr, Mathura,      A‘zam Khan, jagirddr, Mathura, 98,
    98, 105, 227                              103, 104, 105, 215, 224
Alwar, sarkir, 22 n., 41                   ‘Aziz Koka, Mirza, titled A‘zam Khan
 Amber, 28, 70, 218, 220                      (Khan-i A‘zam), 67, 80, 85
 amin, officer-in charge of revenue
    assessment, 182                        Babu, Gusain, biog. 195
Anandi, Gosa’in, biog. 194                 Bachhal, jdti, sept of the Gaurua caste,
Anant s/o Tilaha, panch/muqaddam of           51, 153
    Vrindavan, 143, 150                    Badan Singh, Thakur, father of Jat
Anantram, Gosa’in, dissident, biog.           chief Suraj Mai, 213, 228, 231
    194;171                                Badauni, ‘Abdu’l Qadir, historian, 63
Anlrai, muqaddam, vill. Raj pur, 182 n.    Badi, Gaurua, peasant, Vrindavan,
‘annas’, silver fractional pieces not in      152
    use in 16th century, 139               Badruddin Husain, ^azi (of Mathura),
Anstey, Vera, 30                              131, 139-40, 142-144
Anupnagar, mod. Anupshahr,                 Bagaris, sept of Jats, at Arith, 164
    pargana, 14, 15, 22 n., 41, 42 n.,     Baharana or Bohariya s/o Gangu or
    115, 197                                  Ganga, panch, vill. Arith, 139-41,
Ao ar Au, pargana, 16, 64, 115, 197;          163
    zamindars & retainers in 22, 41;       Bahram Beg, faujdar, Mathura, 33
    A’ins statistics for, 44-45, 97        Baidnath, Brahman, biog. 195; 116 n.
arazi statistics’in Am-i Akbari, 43-48     Bairagis, ofVrindavan, 27
‘arhar’, crop, 18                          Baitu’l Mil, public treasury, 33, 123,
Arith, village. Old name of                   198, 256
    Radhakund, which see                   Bajra, crop, 18
Arjun, recalcitrant house-tenant,          Ballabh, Gosa’in, biog. 195
    Mathura, 28, 33, 119-20, 255-56        Banaras, recently built temples
Arjun Singh, foot-sepoy accompanying          destroyed, 95, 96
    official party, 37, 123                Banarsldas, author of Ardh-kathanak,
Asaf Khan. 102                                14
Asaffiddaula, 231                          Banarsidas, shiqqdar, pargana
Atas, vill., pargana Sahar, 237, 247          Mathura, 144, 147
                                      Index                                   271

Banas(?) thakur, temple, Dosaich, 72,     Bhaiya Bhagawat Das, Gosa’in, biog.
   83                                         195-96
Banksidhar, representative of             Bhana, muqaddam/zamindar, panch,
   Haridasis, 116                            Vrindavan, 143, 144, 152
Bans! and Mano hardas Saha, drawers       Bhana, patti, in nagla Nagu, vill.
   of hundi, 30                              Dosa’ich, 145. Same as Bhanan ?
Bansidhar, Gusain, biog. 195                 Also described as nagla, 145
Bansidhar Jhokar, discounts bun di, 30    Bhanan, hamlet in Vrindavan, 20
Banwari, headman, Arith, 168, 174         Bhanan, Bhana, 'inhabitant’, vill.
Banyas. See Baqqdls                          Dosaich, 145
Baqqdls (Banyas), at Vrindavan, 138,      Bhao Singh, Raja of Amber, 191
   147 (three appearing as witnesses)     Bharan s/o Lalu, sells land in vill.
Bari, pargana, in sarkar Agra, 231           Dosaich, 146
Bari Khan, headman, Arith, 21, 39,        Bharmal, Raja of Amber, 59, 62, 82,
   167, 168, 174                             191
Barji, in pancbdyat of vill. Gopinath     Bhatesar, Govind-dev-temple idols
   temple, 147-48                            removed to, 112
Barkhan Pur (?), identified with          Bhat (?) Pandit, advisor to Abu’l Fazl
   Brikhbhan temple, Barsana, 71, 83         on temples, 64-65, 80
Barkhasan, tappa, 229                     Bhavanand, adhikari, Gopinath
Barsana, town, pargana Sahar, 28, 71,        temple, biog. 196; buys land in vill.
   72, 205,218,220, 228                      Dosaich, 146, 147
Basahi Buzurg, Basal, vill., in pargana   Bhikya, headmen, Arith, 170, 174
   Sahar, 92, 100, 101                    Bhimsen, historian, 29, 112 n.
Batala, pargana in siiba Panjab, 116      Bhuteshar, temple of Bhutesvar
   n., 195                                   Mahadev, Mathura, 71, 83
Bathain, vill, 231, 256                   bigha, unit of area, 179 n.
Bayana, dastur-circle, 17, 18; crop       Bihari, headman, Rajpur, 181
   rates, 46, 73, 134, 155 & n.           Bihari Jiu, temple ar Dosaich,
Bayana, indigo tract, 18                     Vrindavan, 71, 83; at Arith, 167
Bayana, sarkar (later abolished), 76,     Bijai Singh, disputed ruler of Amber,
   134, 144, 145, 147                        191 & »., 206, 207,216-17,219,
Bayutdt, Imperial Property &                 229, 230, 235, 241
   Household Department, 33, 124          Bilasdas/Vilasadasa, Gosa’in, biog. 196;
begdr, forced labour, 97                      167, 190
Belu or Bilu, earlier name of vill.       Bilu. See Belu
   Rajpur, 78, 178, 179, 209              Bindraban, Brindaban. See Vrindavan
Bengal, 1, 14, 93,210,211,257             Bindraban, Bairagi, biog. 196
Bhagwan, land-grantee, Dosa’ich, 82       Bindraban Das, Gosa’in, 31
Bhagwandas, agent of Ja'far Khan,         Bindrabandas, biog. 197; recipient
   105                                       of land-grant by Jahangir, 92,
Bhagwan Das, Gosa’in, biog. 195; 61           100
Bhagwandas, raja of Amber, 62, 70,        Birbal or Birbar, famous courtier of
   82, 191                                   Akbar, 62, 82
272                                 Index

Bir Singh Bundela, Raja of Orchha,       Braj Sundar, temple, 247
   70, 111                               Brindavan Das, Gosa’in, biog. 202
Biru, zamindar, Vrindavan, 144           Bucha, Bucha, ‘inhabitant’, vill.
Bishan Kunwar, widow of Bangali Rai         Dosaich, 145
   Agarwal, mahajan, 30, 252             Burhanu’l Mulk Sa‘adat Khan, 213
Bishanpur, vill. in pargana Mathura,
   revenue assigned to, 156              Cattle-rearing, 23-25
Bishan Singh, Raja of Amber, 191,        Cesses, prohibited, 74-75; listed, 76,
   204-05, 225                              86
Bisvanath ChakrabartT, Gosain,           Chain Gopal, land-grantee in Mathura
   dissident, biog. 197; 171                pargana,- 61, 82
biswi, right to 'Zm of tax or produce    Chaitanya, biog. 202; 14, 25, 106
   leviable by panch, 151                Chak Sauli, vill. 72, 83
Bithal, Rai, See Vithal Rai              Chamars, fields of, in vill. Rajpur,
Blochmann, H., 43                           19, 184 & n.; at vill. Arith, 164 &
Brahmans, zamindars, 22-23                  n., 173
Braj, dialect, 14, 158-160, 193          Champa Bai, mother of Kishor Das,
Brajanand, Gosain, biog. 197-200; 27,       donor, 245-46
    114, 115, 116, 122, 125, 171,260,    Chand and Chandrasen, headmen,
   261                                      vill. Arith, 167, 168, 170, 174
Braj Bhum, 5, 253; name & territorial    Chandar Sen, biog. 202-03
   extent, 13-16 & nn. 41-42 &           Chank Kunwar, Gosain, biog. 203;
    nn.; dialect of, 14, 158-60,             170,190
    193; agriculture, 16-18; rural       Charju, s/o Dayal, firqa/thok Das, vill.
    society, 18-25; cattle-rearing,         Arith, 175
   23-25; towns, 25-29; merchants        Chatrapurvas Khijurya, vill., tappa
   & money-lending, 30-32;                  Khoh, 207
   administration, 32-35; people 35-     Chatrbhoj, local official, 227
    37; relations among communities,     Chaturbhoj temple, Petha, 71, 83
    37-40; statistics of Braj Bhum       Chaudhuri, official, 114 & n.
   parganas in A’in-i Akbari, 43-46;     Chauraman, Jat chief, 213
    extent of uncultivated expanse       Chhabela Ram, Raja, 216
    in, 47, 48; land-grants in, 48-50;   china, crop, 18
    zamindar castes in, 50-52; Agra-     Chintaman Bangali, biog. 203
    Delhi highway in, 52-53; tax of      Chintaman Bhat, advisor to Abu’l Fazl
    Re 1 imposed on each vill. of, for      on temples, 64-65, 80
    benefit of Chaitanya Gosains, 114-   Chirghatvari, Vrindavan, 204
    15, 197,198                          Chitrarupa. See: Jadrup
Brajbuli, poetry in, 1, 14-15
Braj Jananand, Syamanand!, biog. 200     Dadhram, foot-soldier, 37
Braj Kunwar, Gosa’in, biog. 200-01;      Daharwa, vill. in pargana Mahaban,
    121, 170, 171, 190                     202
Braj La‘l, Gosa’in, biog. 201-02; 172,   Damodar (?), recipient of land-grant
    190                                    by Jahangir, 92, 93
                                      Index                                   213

Damodar Das, Gosa in, biog. 203            Dudh Ram, foot-sepoy accompanying
Damodar Das, Radha Vallabhi, 28,             official party, 123
   106, 120-21                             Dunda s/o Bhagwa, Gaurua, punch,
Damodar Raman, father of Gopi                sells uncultivated land, Vrindavan,
  Raman, Gosa’in, 214                        152, 205
Dara Shukoh, prince, 24, 64 «., 92,        Dundi & Manika, peasants, sharing
  97; jagirdar of Mathura, 98, 106           rights with the panch in same field,
Daud Khan, officer of Prince Dara            Vrindavan, 150-51
  Shukoh, 97, 106,215
Dayal, Gaurua, Vrindavan, sells land,      earlobe-punctures, 157
  205                                      Elliot, H.M., 13, 23
Dayal, headman, Arith, 168, 171            escheat, rules & practice of, at
Dayal, sarrdf (banker), at Vrindavan,          Mathura, 123-25
   138, 147                                Etawa, t/asriir-circle, 73
Dayali, widow, Mathura, 40, 251            famines, 37
Daya Ram Sahu (moneylender), his           Faqir Shah, thanedar, Vrindavan, 122
   kunj at Arith, 173                      Faridabad, pargana, 15 & n., 42, 115,
Dearam, muqaddam, vill. Rajpur,                197
   182                                      Farid Bhakkari, Shaikh, historian, 107
Delhi, 7, 31, 52                            Fateh Singh, panch, Vrindavan, 29
Delhi hr-Mwr-circle, tax rates per crop,    Fath Chand, agent of Waqa’i'Nigdr-i
   46                                          Shahl, Royal News Reporter,
Delhi, sarkar, 15 n., 41                       Mathura, 123
Delhi, siiba, 15 n., 41                    faujdar, judicial functions of, 117,
Devadas or Dwadas Adat, temple, 67,            118-19
   69, 83, 86, 95, 106                      fenugreek, 18
Devaki Nandan, Gosa in, ‘Sarsat’
   Brahman, allegedly occupies land        Gadai, muqaddam, vill. Raj pur, 182
   of Gopinath temple, Vrindavan,          Gadai, peasant, resident vill. Dosaich,
   203,249-50                                181
Dharu (later ruined, Dhruvali)             Gadhu s/o Piru, sells cultivated land,
   temple, Mathura, 71, 83                   vill. Dosaich, 147
Dhaulera, vill. near Vrindavan, 62, 98,    Gagadhara Bhatta/Gadadhar, biog. 203
   72, 84; temple & grant in, 81, 82,      Gahan, see Gawan
   103                                     Ganesa s/o Marera (?), Gaurua, panch,
Disease, 36-37, 157                          sells agricultural land, patti Bhana,
Dokan, temple, vill. Dokan, pargana          nagla Nagu, Vrindavan, 145
   Sahar, 83                               Ganesh, ‘inhabitant’, vill. Dosaich,
Dosaich, Dosa’ij, Dochhaichh, vill.           145
   within Vrindavan, panch of, 20, 25,     Gangadasi, daughter of Kishandas,
   26, 39 n., 62, 72, 81-82, 84, 103,        witness before Qazi, Agra, 120
    118, 153; temples of, 81-82; &         Gangaram, peasant, vill. Rajpur, 19
   grant land in, 82; land transactions    Gankar, pargana, sarkar Udambar,
   in, 145-47; site of, 149                   Bengal, 100, 257
274                                  Index

Gantoli, vill., pargana Sahar, 72, 73,    Gohoja or Gohaja or Gohanja s/o
   82                                       Asuwa or Asuya, panch vill. Arith,
Ganu/Gavnu, son of Teja, panch, 143,        139-41, 162
   150,152                                Gokul, village/town, 24, 61, 70
Gaudiyas, used for members of the         Gokula, Jat chief, 23 n.
   Chaitanya sect, 116                    Gopa, patti/nagara, in Dosa ich,
Gauranga, Bangali, biog. 203-04; 28,        136, 146, 147, 157, 255, 258;
   106, 120-21                              ‘mukadams’ of, 252
Gaurua, peasant caste, 19-20, 21, 51,     Gopaldas, Gosa’in, biog. 208-09; 58-
   117-118, 144, 152-53, 163-64 &           59, 66 n., 76, 78, 82, 100, 110,
   163 n., 175, 204                         178, 179, 180, 190
gau-shumdrl, cattle-tax, 24, 97, 107      Gopaldas, Pujari, agent of Jiv Gosa’in,
Gawan (Gavna, Gawanu, Gahan),               biog, 209; 130, 141-42, 166
   ‘inhabitant’, pawci, Dosaich, 118,     Gopalpur, vill. in pargana Ao, 197
   133, 145, 149; a Gaurua, 152           Gopinath, biog. 210; rival to Gopi
Ghairat Khan, faujdar (?), Mathura,         Raman, Gosa’in, 171
   210, 220, 230                          Gopinath temple, Jaipur, 2
Ghasi, cotton-carder, Mathura, 40,        Gopinath temple, Vrindavan, 2, 24,
   251                                      30,31, 61, 69,82, 84, 103,203,
Ghasi, s/o Jagdev, peasant, Arith, 172      218, 224, 258; its cattle exempted
Ghasi, s/o Jaimal, peasant, Arith, 172      from tax, 111; idol removed, 112
Ghulam Nabi, Darogha, Baitu’l Mdl,          n., 249; grant continues under
   Mathura, 123; seizes Seo Rams            Aurangzeb, 113; land purchased in
   property in Agra for Baitu’l Mdl,        its behalf in patti Gopa, Vrindavan,
   123-24, & the same property,             136-37; vill. of, 137, 146, 147;
   again, on Kishan Charan’s death,         grant in vill. Rajpur, 180, 185-86;
   124                                      disputes over land of, 249-50; grant
Ghulam Qadiri, granted Re 1, 4 as.,         in Bengal, 250
   per village, pargana Batala, 116 n.,   Gopinath, wine-seller, Vrindavan, 38,
   193                                      62,153-54
Girdhar, son of Bithal (Vithal) Rai,      Gopinath Das, biog. 210-11
   Vallabhi priest, 64 n., 97             Gopinath Ji, biog. 211
Girdhar, headman, vill. Arith, 167, 174   Gopi Raman, Gosa’in, biog, 211-15;
Gobinda s/o Chuhara or Chohra,              34,171-72, 190
   panch, vill. Arith, 139-41, 163        Gorai, s/o Junaid, peasant, Vrindavan,
Gobind Charan, Gosa’in, biog. 204-08;       158
   28, 32-33, 115, 116, 121-22, 124,      Gordhan, or Govardhan, temple, vill.
   125, 170, 190, 261                       Gantoli, 82
Gobind Das, Gosa’in, biog, 208; 190,      Gordhan/Govardhan, temple,
   260, 261                                 Mathura, 83, 84
Gobind-das, official under Dara           Gornath, temple, Mathura, 83
   Shukoh, 106                            Gosa indas, Goswami Das, Gosa’in,
Gobindpriya, dissident woman                biog. 215-16; 102, 106, 113, 181,
   devotee, biog. 208; 171                  182, 183, 190
                                      Index                                   275

Gosains, or Goswamis, ofVrindavan/         Haidar Khan, holding jagtr in pargana
  Chaitanya sect, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 39,     Sahar, 204
   189-261                                 Haidu, locality in Vrindavan, 203, 254
Goswami, Shrivats, 2, 113 n.               Hakim Beg, faujdar (?) of Mathura,
Gosvamis, see Gosains                        94
Goswamy, B.N., 74-75                       Halahu/Lahnu/Halau, ‘inhabitant’,
Govardhan Nath, temple in                    vill. Dosaich, 145
  Govardhan, 97                            Hamida Banu Begam, mother of
Govardhan Nath temple, Gokul, 63             Emperor Akbar, 24 n., 64 n.
Govind-dev, ‘Gobind Rai’, temple,          Harbans, headman, vill. Rajpur, 181
  Vrindavan, 1, 30 8c n. 58, 77, 79,       Harbhakt, officer of Jai Singh Sawai’s
   94, 95-96, 106, 121, 169, 219,            establishment, 220
  222-23, 236, 245, 254, 260; tax          Harbhakt Rai, Deputy Governor,
  on its cattle remitted, 24, 111;           Agra Province, (same as prec.?),
  management of 27, 115-16; idols            243
   of, 112 & n., 255; Akbar’s grants       Har (?) Chand, temple, Dosaich, 72,
   to, 58, 59, 62, 66-67, 68-69, 82,         83
  85-86, 92-93; Kishan Das’s rights        Harcharan Das, Gosa’in, biog. 216
   in, 104, 170-71; Brahmans suicide       Hardas, Haridas, ‘inhabitant’, of
   at, 105-06; destruction of part of        Dosaich, 118, 145
  building, 112-13 n.; escheat not to      Hardat, pujari, Radha Rawan temple,
   apply to, 125; garden of, 145-47;         biog. 216-17
  fields of, 154; buys tax-paying land,    Har Gobind, Brahman, 106, 254
   154-55                                  Hari, representative of Radhavallabhis
Goyasya, Chamar, sells land at Arith,        at Vrindavan, 116
   173, 221                                Hari Beta, sells land in vill. Dosaich,
Grewal, J.S., 74-75                           147 ’
Growse, F.S., 48, 51                       Haridas, founder of Bihari Jiu temple,
Gujar Mal, jagirdar of Mathura, 185,         Vrindavan, 217-18
   256-57                                  Haridas, Hardas, s/o Kaidar, Gosa’in,
Gujar Mal, ofSrimal caste, of Delhi,         biog. 217-18; 15, 25, 93, 114, 145,
   31                                         146, 147, 170, 190,260, 261
Gujars, zamindars, 22, 153; at Arith,      Haridasis, 29
   164                                     Hari Gopal Rai, temple, identified
Gulal, or Golal, son of‘Ali Khan, &          with Hari-dev temple, Govardhan,
   father of Har Rai, Radhakund, 40          66 n., 70, 82, 84
   & n.                                    Harivans, Harbans, founder of
Gurdaspur, district, report of               Radhavallabhi sect, land-grantee,
  assemblage of panchayat of a                62, 69, 82
  market, 137                              Har Kishan, Gosa’in, biog. 218; 190,
Gwanu/Ganu, son ofTeja, panch/               260, 261
  muqaddam, Vrindavan, 142-43              Har Kishan Das, Gosain, biog. 218
Gyan Gudri, quarter of Vrindavan,          Har Rai, son of Gulal, son of‘Ali
  29                                          Khan of Radhakund, 39-40 8c
276                                    Index

   40 n. 118, of Gaurua Jadon caste,        Islamabad, name officially given to
   174,175                                      Mathura (which see), 111
Har Rai, temple, vill. Govardhan, 83        Islam Khan, jagirddr, Mathura, 98,
Hasan ‘All Khan, faujdar of Mathura,            103, 233
   23 & ».; Governor, suba Agra,            ftibar Khan, officer under Jahangir,
   destroys temple at Mathura, 112              92; verifies temple grants, 99-100
Hasang, vill., in pargana Mahaban,          I‘timad ‘Ali Khan, diarist, 29
   195                                      I‘tiqad Khan, 216
havdldar, officer-in-charge, Arith, 167     Izid Bakhsh ‘Rasa’, Diwan-i Bayutdt
Hindaun, 218, 220; pargana, 232                 Department, Agra, 33-34, 124-25,
Hira, s/o Junaid, peasant sharing               205
   rights in plot of land with six
   panch, Nagar Nagu, Vrindavan,            Jadon Indar, Gosa’in, 194
   150, 158                                 Jadrup (Chitrarupa), ascetic, meetings
Hirdai, s/o Jagdev, peasant, Arith, 172         with Jahangir, oppressed by Hakim
Hirdairam, headman, Arith, 170, 174             Beg, 94
Hodal, pargana, 15, 41, 73, 115, 197,       Jadu, son ofSandar Gaurua, post of
   231, 256; zamindars & retainers              panch held among his descendants,
   in, 22; statistics for, 44-45; Jats as       151-52
   zamindars, 61; temple grants in,         Jadu, in panchdyat, vill. of Gopinath
   26, 81, 83                                   temple, 147-48
Hodal, town, 71                             Jadu Gaurua, sons of, sell biswt right,
Humaun/Hamau/Humyan,                            151
   ‘inhabitant’, panch, vill. Dosaich,      Jadunath, Brahman, biog, 218
   28, 39, 118, 135, 144, 145, 152,         Ja‘far Khan, jagirddr, Mathura, 98,
    158                                         105, 209
hundi, bill, sale & discounting of, 30      Ja'far Saljuqi, faujdar of Mathura,
Husain, Zakir, of National Archives,            exempts temple cattle from tax,
   2, 67 n.                                     111
                                            Jagannath, Gosa’in, biog, 218-219; 28,
Iftikharu’ddin, qdzi, Mathura, 250              30, 115-16, 171, 173, 190, 260, 261
Illiteracy, in Braj Bhum, 37; in            Jagannath, mdli, Vrindavan, 252
    Vrindavan, 157                          Jagannath s/o Jairam, s/o Sanwle,
Imtiyaz Mahal, Imperial princess, 199,          Rajput Jasawat (Gaurua Jadon) vill.
    210, 212; holding Mathura in jagir,         Arith, 162, 170, 174, 175
    212                                     jagirddr, ja’igirddr, holder of territorial
‘Inayat Khan, 105, 254                          assignment, 74; of Mathura, 32, 98
‘Inayatullah Khan, minister, 38, 125        Jagjivan Das, Gosa’in, biog. 221
     & n», 257                              Jahanara, Princess, mosque of, at
indigo, 18 & n.                                 Agra, 111
Institute of Vaishnav Studies, USA, 2       Jahangir, emperor, 26, 38, 64 n.,
interest, rate of, 156                          218, 256; confirms Akbar’s grants
Isarwi, woman, resident, Mathura, 4,            to temples, 92; grants land to
     118-19, 255                                Thakurduara temple. Vrindavan,
                                        Index                                      211

    & Thakur Bhoj Sundar temple,             jizya, poll-tax on non-Muslims, 36,
    Basahi, 92; converts Todar Mais              114
     grant to Madan Mohan temple             Jodharam, in service of Suraj Mai,
     into imperial grant, 68, 92, 110; his      250
     order on escheat, 123                   Jogner, vill., in pargana Gankar,
Jahanglrpur Adda, = Devdas Adda, 69             Bengal, 100, 257
Jaimal, ‘inhabitant’, vill. Dosaich, 145     Jugal Kishor, temple, Vrindavan, 70,
Jaipur, 1, 255                                  83
Jairam, headman, Arith, 170, 174             Juna, Kachhl, peasant, Vrindavan,
Jai Singh, Mirza Raja, of Amber,                153-154
    obtains control over Govind-dev          Junaid, headman/zamindar, vill.
    temple by Shahjahan’s transfer of           Dosaich, 20, 40, 118, 134, 144;
    temples grant to him, 95-96; other          Hindu sons of, 158
    refs., 102, 103, 106, 111 «., 121,
     155, 170, 191, 198, 199,203, 212,       Kabiraj/Kaviraj Krishan Das, Gosa in,
    214, 234, 245, 250, 254                     biog. 223-24
Jai Singh (Sawai), Raja of Amber, 32-        Kabul, 18
    33, 125, 171, 191, 198, 199, 205-        Kabuli gram, 17
    06, 207, 211, 212, 220, 221, 224,        Kachhl, caste of market-gardeners,
    228, 230, 235, 236, 237, 241, 242,           153,154
    243-44, 251, 257, 258                    kah-charai, grazing tax, 24, 97
Jalesar, pargana, 15, 115, 197;              Kahi Singh Rathor, official, Amber
    zamindars and retainers in, 22;             court, 170
    statistics for, 44-45                    Kalal, caste of liquor-makers Sc
Jan ‘All Beg, Darogha-i ‘Adalat,                sellers, 153
    superintendent of the Qazi’s court),     Kalyan Rai, temple, Dosaich, 72, 83
    Mathura, 122                             Kalyan, chaudharl, vill. Dosaich, 146
Jarrett, H.S., 43                            Kalyan Singh, Rao, 105
Jasodha Nandan, temple, Dosa’ich,            Kamal Nain, Gosain, priest,
    67, 72, 83, 87, 88, 102                     Radhakund temple, 172
Jats, uprising of, 35 & n., 113, 123-        Kaman, pargana, 15, 41, 115, 147,
    24, 153, 202, 209                          218, 236; zamindars retainers
Jats, zamindars, 22, 23, 51                     in, 22; statistics for, 44-45; Jats as
Jewar, seat ofpargana in sarkar Delhi,         zamindars, 51
    94, 99, 101                              Kaman, town, 28, 30, 208, 220, 228,
Jiv, Gosa in, s/o Vallabh Gosa’in, biog.       249; receives idols from Govind-
    221-23; acquired land in Arith,            dev temple, 112 n.,'255
    130-32, 139-42, 165-66, & in             Kamdev Acharaj (Acharya), biog. 224;
    Vrindavan, 132-34, 142-44, 145;            received land-grant from Jahangir,
    custodian of both Madan Mohan              92, 100
    & Govind dev temples, Vrindavan,         Kamna or Kamana s/o Kanhar or
    59, 77, 169; other refs., 21, 27, 38,      Kanhar, panch, vill. Arith, 139-41,
    58-59, 68, 70, 77, 96, 105, 121,           161
    149, 170, 179, 190, 191,260              Kanhar Das, Kayat, biog. 224; 147-48
278                                   Index

Kanho, or Kanhau, wife of Kaitam, or       khwud-kdshta, self-cultivated land, 179
   Gautam, mahajan, 30, 219                Kirpa Ram, nd’ib-faujddr, Mathura,
Karauli, sarkdr Kanauj, 257                   214,243
Karori, high-ranking revenue collector     Kishan, Pandit, Pujarl, biog. 225
   in khalisd, 134-35                      Kishan Chand, panch, Vrindavan, 250
Kashi Ram, biog. 224                       Kishan Charan, Gosain, priest of
Kashi Ram, Gosa’in, biog. 224-25; 261         Govind-dev temple, biog. 225-26;
Katgar, pargana, in sarkdr Udambar            35, 123-24, 190, 260, 261
   (Tanda), Bengal, 100                    Kishan Charan, Gosa’in, adhikdri,
Kesari Singh or Kirat Singh, jagirdar         Madan Mohan temple, biog. 227-
   of Khandela, 208                           28; 30, 33, 156, 190
Keshav Rai, temple, Mathura, 34, 38,       Kishan Das, land-grantee, 81
   70, 83, 84; railing destroyed, 111      Kishan Das. See: Krishan Das, Gosa’in
   &       building destroyed, 111-12,     Kishan Dev Bhattacharaj, biog. 231
   119                                     Kishan/Krishan Kund, pond, vill.
khadar, riverine flood-land, in vill.         Radhakund, 132, 161-62, 170,219,
   Rajpur, 183-184                            239, 246
Khaliluilah Khan, or Khalil Khan,          Kishan Priya, widow of Braj Kunwar,
  jagirdar, Mathura, 105,215                  Gosa’in, biog. 228-30; 4, 32-33, 37,
khalisa, land not assigned in jdgir, 134      121-23
Khandela, pargana, in sarkdr Nagaur,       Kishan Rai, biog. 231
   208                                     Kishan Rai Jalori, temple, Dosa ich,
Khandi, s/o Jagdev, peasant, Arith, 172       67, 83, 84, 99-100
Khamanand, rich Brahman of                 Kishan Das, Gosa’in, biog. 231-32;
   Mathura, buying land at Arith,             190
   168, 233                                Kishor Das, representative of
Khan Jahan Muzaffar, jagirdar,                Radhavallabhis, 116
   Mathura, 98, 102, 103, 215              Kishor Das, Rajavat, s/o Champa Bai,
kharj-i sadir o warid, 'expenditure           245-46
   on those who come and go*,              Kishoridas Soti, Chaudhuri, biog. 232;
   deductible from gross revenue              167
   collected at village-level, 114, 115    Kisor, Gaurua, peasant, Vrindavan,
Khoh, See Koh Mujahid                         152
Khohri, pargana, 15, 41, 115, 16           Koh Mujahid or Khoh, pargana, 15,
   n.; zamindars retainers in, 22;            41, 115, 197, 198, 207; zamindars
   statistics for, 44-45                      & retainers in, 22; statistics of, 44-
Khunya, Chamar, sells land at Arith,          45; Jats as zamindars in, 51
   173, 221                                Koi, f/uffur-circle, 17; crop rates for
Khwaja Ghazzal, shiqqdar, 99, 102             46
Khwaja Jahan, 101                          Koi, indigo-producing locality, 18 &
Khwaja Muhammad, jagirdar, pagana            n.
   Sahar, 201                              Koi, pargana, 15, 41, 115, 197,
Khwaja Muhammad Husain, local                zamindars & retainers in, 22,
   official in Mathura (?), 101              statistics of 44-45
                                       Index                                 279

Koi, sarkar, 22 n., 41, 42                 Lal Muhammad, appointed zamindar,
Koi (Aligarh), town, peasants held             Mathura region, 23
   prisoners at, 35-36                     Land prices, Vrindavan, 26, 27
Koli, s/o Sundar, sells land in            levirate, custom of, 20
   Vrindavan, 237                          literacy, low level of, 37
kori, millet, 18                           Loma ka (?) Nagar, vill. in pargana
Koru, muqaddam, Vrindavan, 143,                Mathura, 82
    152
KosT Das, Gusa’in, biog. 232               Madan Mohan temple, Vrindavan, 24,
kotwal, judicial functions of, 117,          30, 31, 62, 68-69, 77, 78, 91-93,
    119                                      94, 99, 103, 106, 158, 169, 227,
Krishan Das/Kishan Das, Gosain,              231, 257; Todar Mais grant, 60;
   biog. 232-34; successor to seat of        annual income from pargana Jewar,
   Jiv Gusain, 96, 104-05, 167, 168          94, 99, 101, 104; Akbar’s grants to,
        190; deprived of custody of          58-59, 60, 67, 82, 84, 85-86, 87-
   Govind-dev temple, 170                    88, 91-92, 95, 102, 106, 110, 180
Krishan Rai, grandson of Gopinath            & n., 184; Jahangir converts Todar
    Gosa’in, sells kunj at Arith, 171-72     Mai’s grant into imperial one, 68,
Krishna, deity, and Braj, 13, 14             92, 100-01; grants confirmed by
Krishna Das Kaviraj. See Kabiraj/            Shahjahan, 95; sounding of gong
   Kaviraj Krishan Das                       at, 96, 103, 108; grants continued
Krishnapriya, dissident woman                under Aurangzeb, 113; grant-lands
   devotee, biog. 208; 171                   in vill. Rajpur, 184-185.
Kunbis, vegetable gardeners, vill.         Madho, s/o Sukhdev, panch, sells plot
   Rajpur, 183-84                            of cultivated land, Vrindavan, 152,
Kunbiwara, fields cultivated by              205
   Kunbis, vill. Rajpur, 183-84            Madho or Madhav Ray, priest,
Kunja, bada-farosh (wine seller), field      Gopinath temple, biog. 238; 61, 62,
   of, Vrindavan, 153                        69, 113, 179
Kunj Das, biog. 234-37                     Mahaban, Mahavan, pargana, 15, 41,
Kunjdasi, recipient of land-grant by         42, 50, 115, 116 n., 195, 197, 202;
   Jahangir, biog. 237-38; 92, 93,           zamindars & retainers in, 22; cattle
   101                                       in, 24-25, 106-07; statistics for,
Kunjera, vill., pargana Sahar, 101,          44-45, 97
   204, 237                                Mahadev temple, Arith, 162, 163
Kunj Gali, ‘Grove lane’, in Vrindavan,     Maha Mohan, temple, Dosa’ich, 83
   29 & n., 143                            Mahmud Balkhi, traveller, 94
                                           Maholi, pargana, 48, 73-74
Lachi Ram, 249-50                          Mahyar Khan, faujdar of Mathura, 27,
Lahnu (Halau ?). See ‘Halahu’,               28, 116 & n., 171, 199, 232
Lahore, 18, 52, 64, 65                     Majha s/o Gale or Guli or Gali, panch,
Lakhi, Gaurua, peasant, 152                  vill. Arith, 139-41, 162
Lala, Gusa’in, biog. 238                   Majhu, Gaurua, peasant, Vrindavan,
La‘l Chand, Gaurua, panch, 152               152
280                                  Index

Mali, caste of flower & vegetable        Mathura, pargana, 15, 25, 41, 42, 64,
  growers, 153                             72, 73-74, 76, 82, 83, 88, 100, 114,
Malihabad pargana, sarkdr Lakhnau,         115, 143, 144, 197; jagirdars of, 32,
 farman on grants within it, with          185; in khdlisa, 134; qdzis of, 36;
  Todar Mai’s seal, 178 n.                 A’ins statistics for, 44-45; amin
Malik Muhammad, Diwdn-i Bayutdt,           of, 182; spellings of name, 57;
  Agra, 124, 205                           revenue-rates in, 155
Man, vill. in tappa Tarauli, pargana     Mathura, sarkdr, creation of 16, n.,
  Sahar, 101, 238                          42 & n.
Mandwi Ram, quarter of Mathura,          Mathura, shoe maker, holds land in
  31,251                                   Arith, 173
Manga, muqaddam, Vrindavan, 133,         Mathura, town, 13 & n., 25, 28, 30,
  143                                      31, 33, 34, 36, 40, 62, 63, 70, 72,
Mangotla (or Mugara, mod.                  93, 94, 97, 119-21, 149, 194, 204,
  Maghora), pargana, 15, 41, 64,           218, 220, 224-25, 231; temples of,
  115, 197, 228, 256; zamindars            80, 81
  Sc retainers in, 22; land-grants       Mathuradas Sahgal, karori of sarkdr
  to temples in, 26, 81, 83; Alns          ‘Bayana’ or tarf of Mathura, 134,
  statistics for, 44-45                     137, 144, 145, 147
Manika, peasant. See: Dundi &            Mehta Gokuldas, official at Mathura,
  Manika                                   243
Manikanth, Gosa’in, priest,              Mehta Sitaldas, 38, 104-05, 168 n.
  Radhakishan temple, Arith, biog.         (See also: Sitaldas)
  238-39; 172                            Meos, zamindars, 22 n.
Mankanth or Makhna, s/o Laichand,        Mint, rupee-issuing, Mathura, 25
  Gaurua, panch, sells uncultivated      Miran Sadr-i Jahan, Sadru’s Sudur,
  land in Vrindavan: 152, 205              67 n.
Manohar Das, Gosa’in, biog. 239          Mir Husaini, head of Bayutdt, Agra,
Manohar Ray, Gosa’in, dissident, biog.      124, 225
  239; 171                               Mir Madan, Governor’s agent at
Manohari, wife of Lakhu, Khandelwal        Mathura, 32, 122
  Banya, 30, 219                         Mirza Bahram Beg, faujdar, Mathura,
Mansarovar, vill., 24                       122
Man Singh, Raja of Amber, 15,            Mohan, peasant, resident, vill.
  20, 26, 50, 59, 68, 93, 94, 195;         Dosaich, 181
  his annual grant to Govind-dev         Mohan Das, Swami, dissident, biog.
  temple, 99,217; purchased land           239;116
  in Vrindavan, 134-35, 136, 145,        Mominabad, name given to Vrindavan
  232                                      by Aurangzeb, 89
Manu, Joshi (astrologer), his kunj at    Moosvi, Shireen, 17, 32, 41, 47, 50,
  Arith, 173                                155-56
Manuhu or Manuho, vill. in pargana       Moreland, W.H., 43
  Hodal, 73, 83                          Mortgages, loss of peasants’ land by,
Mat, tappa, 15, 50, 115, 197               in Vrindavan, 156
                                     Index                                281

Mu'azzam, prince (later, Emperor         Nagu, nagla in vill. Dosaich,
  Bahadur Shah), 170, 201, 206             Vrindavan, 20, 134, 149-50, 152,
Muazzam Khan, Mir Jumla, 231, 258          153, 157, 183, 204, 251, 255, 258;
Mubariz Khan, officer under Prince         muqaddams of, 252
  Muazzam, 170, 176, 201
Muhammad ‘All, 215                       Nagu (s/o) Guhaje, peasant,
Muhammad ‘Arif, qdzi, Mathura, 33,         Vrindavan, 144
  119                                    Nagu, son ofTeja, panch/muqaddam
Muhammad Baqir, head of Bayutdt,           ofVrindavan, 135, 142-43, 150
  Agra, 124, 226                         Najm, headman, zamindar, vill.
Muhammad Hafiz, qazi, of Sahar,            Dosaich, 20, 118, 134, 144
  118                                    Nandesar, village, 231, 236
Muhammad Shah, emperor, 125              Namak haraman, posthumous abusive
Muhkam Singh, Raja, 172                    designation given to the Sayyid
Mukherjee, Dr Tarapada, co-author,         Brothers, 17, 18-19,261
  1, 2 & n., 3, 4, 5, 6, 109             Nandgram (Nandgaon) vill., 72, 218,
Mukhtar Khan, Governor of Agra             220, 238; temples of, 80
  province, 15 & n., 18, 27, 32-33,      Nand Kishor Syamanand!, biog. 240-
  35, 39, 122, 205,206,215,216,            44; 121-22
  228, 229, 234, 235, 243; order         Nand Kunwar, Gosa’in, biog. 244
  imposing levy of Re 1 on all           Nand Lal, recipient of land-grant
  villages of Braj Bhum parganas for       from Jahangir, 92, 100
  benefit of Chaitanya gosd’ins, 114-    Nand Nandan temple, Vrindavan, 62,
  15, 197; his acquisition of building     70, 72, 82
  materials from Vrindavan, 115 n.       Nand Rai, temple, vill. Nandgram,
Mukramat Khan, jagirdar, Mathura,          83, 84
  98, 105                                Narayan, Brahman, disciple of Pathal
Mundy, Peter, 35                           Bairagi, 136, 145
muqaddams, (panch), vill. headmen =      Narayan, s/o Lakhya, Gosa’in, biog.
  panch, 20, 131; of Vrindavan, 133,       244
  135, 150; of Radhakund, 160-64;        Narayan Bhatt, author, Vraja bhakti-
  of Rajpur, 186                           vildsa, biog. 244; 177
Murawwat Khan Turkman, same as           Narayan Das, recipient of land-grant
  Murshid Quli Khan Turkman, 107           from Jahangir, 92, 100
Murli, Bangali, biog. 240                Narwi, Narawe, ‘inhabitant’, vill.
Murlidhar, Gusai, biog. 240; middle        Dosaich, 145; a Gaurua, 152
  man buying land at Arith, 169          Naso or Nasso (Nasir), ‘inhabitant’,
Murshid Quit Turkman, faujdar of           panch, vill. Dosaich, 20, 39, 118,
  Mathura, 107                              135-36, 145, 152, 158
Murtaza Bilgrami, geographer, 29,        Nathu Ram, Brahman, intruder at
  30 n.                                    Radhakund, 172, 213
Musavi Khan, Central Sadr, 102, 105      National Archives of India, 2, 3
                                         Nazar Muhammad, appointed
Nagaur, sarkar, 208                        zamindar, Mathura region, 23
282                                   Index

Nirankali, believer in formless God,       Pars!, in panchdyat of vill. Gopinath
   153-54, 252,255                            temple, 147-48
Nitanand Das or Nityanand, Gosain,         Parsotam Misr, biog. 245
   biog. 244-45; 190, 260,261              Pathal, Bairdgi, land-occupant,
Nizam, Nijam, ‘inhabitant’, panch of          Vrindavan, 136, 145
   vill. Dosaich, 20, 39, 118, 135, 144,   Pelsaert, Francisco, 17, 18, 32, 36
   145, 152, 158. Identical with Najm,     Persian wheel, presence uncertain, 17
   above ?                                    & n.
Nizami, K.A., 51                           Perti, Dr R.K., Director, National
Nizamu’l Mulk, 213                            Achives, 67 n.
Noh, pargana, 15, 16 m.,41, 115,           Pitambar, chaudhuri, arbitrator in
   197; zamindars & retainers in,             Gaudiya-Radhavallabhi dispute,
   22; statistics for, 44-45; Jats as         Mathura, 121
   zamindars, 51                           plague, occurrence of, 37
nose-punctures, women only, 158            purdah system, not applicable to
Nur Jahan, queen of Jahangir, 94              Hindu women in qdzis’ courts,
Nur Muhammad, qazl, 34, 214                   118-119
                                           Pita, s/o Gopi, firqa/thok Gale/Gali,
01, pargana, 15, 41, 115, 197;                vill. Arith, 175
   zamindars &c retainers in, 22; Ain s
   statistics for, 44-45                   Qamaruddln Khan, wazlr, 116 n.,
                                              195, 214, 236
Pahari, tfertwr-circle, 17, 18; crop       qaniingo, official, 114 & n.
   rates, 46                               Qasim, son of Daulat, jagirdar
Pahari, Pahadi, pargana, 15, 41, 115,         recognised as zamindar in pargana
    197; zamindars & retainers in, 22;        Sahar, 23
   statistics for, 44-45                   Qasim Khan, jagirdar of Mathura, 98,
Pahl, peasant cultivating in a village        99, 102
   other than his own, 154                 qdzi, judge, registrar, 4, 33; functions
paikdsht, cultivation by peasants from        of, 117
   outside the village (cf. Pahl), 181     Qazi Khan, 82
Palwal, dastfir-circle, crop rates, 46     Qutbuddin, qdzi, Mathura, 33, 125,
Palwal, pargana, 15, 41, 115, 197;            211,229, 230
   zamindars & retainers in, 22;
   statistics for, 44-45                   Radha, deity, 14
panch, village headmen, 19,20,131-32,      Radha Ballabh temple, Vrindavan, 62,
   137, 150; of Vrindavan, 133, 135          82, 84
panchdyat, body of leading persons,        Radha Damodar, temple, Vrindavan,
   137; of vill. of Gopinath temple,         1, 68,211,222, 229, 248
   Vrindavan, sells land, 147-48           Radha Jiwan, temple, Dosaich, 72,
Paramanand, Bairagi, biog. 245               83
Parasram, mall, Vrindavan, 153             Radhakarun Chakamba, temple,
Parmanand, zamindar, vill. Vrindavan,        Dosaich, 72, 83
   144                                     Radha Kishan, temple, Arith, 239
                                   Index                                  283

Radha Kishan/Radha Kishan Das,          Raghunath, Brahman, land-owner,
  Syamanandi, biog. 245-246               vill. Rajpur, 19, 186
Radha Kishandas Chakravarti, Gosain,    Raghunath, Brahman, sevak of temple,
  biog. 245; 95, 170, 190, 260, 261        biog. 247
Radha Krishan, temple, Dosa’ich, 72,    Raghunath, Gaudiya Brahman, biog.
  83, 171                                  247
Radhakund, tank, at Radhakund, 99,      .Raghunat(h), temple, Mathura, 83
  107, 132, 161-62; 167, 170, 171,      Raghunathdas, Gosain, biog. 248;
  219, 239, 240                            buys land in Arith, 21, 130-32,
Radhakund, temple at Radhakund, 1,          139-42, 165-66, transfers it to Jiv
  4, 71, 83, 166                           Gosain, 142, 167; ‘discovers’ sacred
Radhakund, village, previous name:         ponds, at Arith, 161-62, digs
  Arith, 4, 8, 9 n., 20, 21, 28, 36,       them, 166, 170
  39, 58, 71, 72, 105, 130, 150,211,    Rahar = Rahwari, camel-rearing caste,
  213,218, 220, 228-29, 231,233,           vill. Rajpur, 184
  236, 238-39, 239, 245, 253, 256;      Rai Hukum Singh, 232
  doubtful dates of some documents,     Rai Sukhdev, shiqqdar, 233
   138; land obtained by Jiv Gosa’in     Rai Udai Singh, holding Sambhar salt
  directly or through Raghunath Das         beds in jagir, 39
  & Gopal Das, 139-42; history of,       Raj, pdhl, Nagla Nagu, Vrindavan, 154
   161-77; name Arith replaced by        Raja Ram, Sahukar, from Bengal, 130
  Radhakund, 176                         Raja Ram, son of Gulal, son of ‘Ali
Radha Madanmohan, temple,                   Khan, peasant, Arith, 40 n., 174
  Vrindavan, 237, 247                    Raja Ram, s/o Haridas, jirqa/thok
Radha Mohan, Gosa in, biog. 246;            Trabhangi, vill. Arith, 175
  buys kunj at Arith, 172-73             Raj Narayan Das Misra, Gosa’in, biog.
Radha Mohan, temple, Dosa ich, 83           252
Radha Raman Das, Gosain, biog. 246       Rajpur, village, 4, 5, 19, 61, 72, 78,
Radha Rawan or Radha Raman,                 147, 149, 231, 232, 256, grant-land
  temple, Vrindavan, 67, 68, 83, 84,        in, 81, 82, 95, 99, 102, 113, 178-
  99-100, 195,206,211                       86, 209, 227, 238; location, 174
Radhavallabh, temple, Vrindavan, 62,     Rajputs, zamindars, 22-23, 51
  69; part of structure destroyed,       Ramanandis, community, 29
   112-13 n.                             Ramchand Ghosh Thakur, Gosa’in,
Radha-vallabhis, Radha-ballabhis, 29,       dissident, biog. 248-49; 171
   62, 97, 99, 116                       Ram Das, land-grantee, vill. Dhaulera,
Radhavinod Das, Gosain, biog, 246-47        82
Raesil Ji, reputed founder, Gopinath     Ram Das, representative of
  temple, 69                                Ramanandis, 116
Raghav, Purohit, biog. 247               Ram Das Kachhwaha, 67, 80, 85
Raghav Das, biog. 247                    Ramdas Vaishnav, biog. 249
Raghu, muqaddam, Vrindavan, 138          Ram Jivan, Gosain, biog. 249-50; 30
Raghu Dev, zamindar, pargana             Ram Kishan, Gosa’in, priest of
  Mahmud Shahi, Bengal, 250                 Gopinath temple, biog. 250-52; 190
284                                  Index

Ram Kishor, Gosain, adhikdri, Madan          A’in’s statistics for, 44-45; Jats as
   Mohan temple, biog. 251; 31, 156,         zamindars in, 51; boundaries of,
   190                                       73, 93; qdzis of, 36
Ramkunwar, woman deponent, 119            Sahib s/o Nanu, Gaurua, sells
Ram Saran, Gosain, biog. 251-52; 30,         agricultural land, Vrindavan, 145,
   39, 40, 190, 260, 261                      152
Ram Singh, Raja of Amber, 112, 191,       Saidam Baloch, appointed zamindar,
   155                                       Mathura region, 23
Rani Kaur (Kunwar), owned land in         Saif Khan, Governor of suba Agra, 103
   Vrindavan, 101                         Saketpat, temple at Sanket, 71, 83
Ranjit, Ranjita, s/o Jagannath,           Sakitra, vill., in pargana Mangotla,
   Gaurua, firqa/thok Sanvle, vill.          256
   Arith, 162, 175                        Sakni, s/o Bans!, Gaurua, peasant,
Rao Kalyan Singh, of Amber, 95-96,           Vrindavan, 152
   254                                    Salu or Salua s/o Dusa, panch, vill.
Rao Rup Ram, lender, 31                      Arith, 139-141, 162
Ray Narayan Das Misra, biog. 252          Sambhar salt beds, 39,251
‘Rule of Half’, in new land-grants,       Sanatan, Gosa’in, biog. 254; 68, 104,
   74, 180                                    167, 190, 191,260
Rup, Gosain, biog. 252-53; 15, 18 n.,     Sandal (Sanbal), Gaurua, sons of,
   25, 68, 77, 114, 115, 167, 190, 191,      peasants, Vrindavan, 152
   260; retreat of, at Vrindavan, 143     Sanganer, 28
rupee, early use of, 138 & n.             Sanket, 71,218, 220
Rup Kabiraj/Kaviraj, Gosain,              Sankri Khor Ballabh Jiu, shrines, near
   dissident, biog. 253; 171                 Barsana, 72
Rustam Dil Khan, faujdar, 206, 229,       Sanwli, in panchdyat of vill. Gopinath
   235, 241, 243                             Temple, 147-48
Sabal Ram Shukaliya, arbitrator in        sard’is, inns, 51
   Gaudiya-Radhavallabhi dispute,         Satova, vill. in pargana Mathura, 100
   Mathura, 121                           Sat Ram, representative of
                                             Ramanandis, 116
Sa‘dabad, pargana, 22 n., 41, 42,44 n.,   sdvari, ‘gifts, presents’, 75
    115, 197                              Sayyid Fazlullah, official under Dara
Sadiya, vill., pargana, Mangotla, 228        Shukoh, 106
Sadr Jahan al-Husaini, Sadr (Minister     Sayyid Sultan, Waqd'i Nigar,
    of Grants), 87                           Mathura, 32, 122
Sa‘dullah Khan, Finance Minister;         School of Oriental and African
   jagirdar, Mathura, 98, 99, 106            Studies (SOAS), London, 1,2 n.
Sahar, pargana, 15, 22, 41, 64, 72,       Sei, village, 21, 38, 149, 151
    92, 99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106,      Seoni or Saoli, pargana, Khandela,
    115, 116 n., 195, 197, 201,204,          sarkdr Nagaur, 208
   205, 214, 231, 237, 247; ‘haven        Seo Ram, Shiv Ram, Gosa’in, biog.
    of insurgents’, 23; land-grants          254-56; 28, 33, 34, 39, 95-96, &
    to temples in, 26, 81, 83, 88;           96 n., 105-06, 151, 170, 190, 260,
                                     Index                                   285

   261; removes idols of Govind-dev          Arith through a middle man, 169
   temple, 112, 119; his suit against        &      177, 223-34, 240
   tenant, 119-20; makes Kishan           Siyaram, headman, Arith, 170, 174
   Charan heir & successor, 123           small-pox, in Braj Bhum, 36-37; in
Shahabad, pargana in suba Bengal,            Vrindavan, 157
   246                                    Sobhachand, Brahman, of Gujarat, 31
Shahbaz Khan, Kambu, 61, 62, 81,          Sodaman, s/o Banu, Gaurua, peasant,
   82                                        Vrindavan, 152
Shahjahan, emperor, 2, 38, 93, 169,       Sonrakh, Sonrak, vill., pargana, Sahar,
   181, 215; policy towards temple            72, 73, 95, 100, 102, 106 -
   grants; 94-95, 110-11; order on        Srichand, Gosain, priest, Madan
   gong in Madan Mohan temple, 96,           Mohan temple, biog. 256; 60, 100,
   110; order in favour of Kishandas,         180, 190
   96, 233; Mathura administration        Sri Krishan s/o Sri Ram, receives
   under, 97-98, 107; calendar of            in hiba (gift) from his uncle
   documents of his reign, 102-07.            Raghunath, cash and bills, etc., in
Shah Muhammad Nawaz, appointed               Vrindavan, 247
   zamindar, Mathura region, 23           Sri Radha Kant Jiu, temple,
Shaikh Farid, horseman, illiterate, 37,      Vrindavan, 228
   122-23                                 Subal Das, Gosa’in, priest, Madan
Shaikh Raziu’ddin, appointed                 Mohan temple, biog. 256-57; 38,
   zamindar, Mathura region, 23               173, 185, 190
Shaikhsai temple & vill. Shaikhsai,       Sukhdev, shiqqdar (tax collector),
   71,73, 83                                 pargana Sahar, 99, 105, 168
Shaikhzadas, zamindars, 22-23             Sukh Ram, Brahman, partisan of
Shamsuddin Atka, Governor of                 Kishan Priya, 12, 229, 241
   Punjab, 60-61                          Sultan Khan, kotwal, Mathura, 243
Shankar, biog. 254                        Sundardas, Gosain, biog. 257
Shankardas, karkun, pargana Mathura,      Suraj Mai, Jat chief, 250
   102                                    Swamidas, Gosain, biog. 257; 92,
Sherdil, mansabdar, sells hundi, 30           100
Sher Dil Khan, deputy faujdar,            Syaman, zamindar, Vrindavan, 144
   Mathura, 207, 229, 235, 241            Syamanand, Bairagi, biog, 257-58
Sher Shah, king of Delhi, 131, 138        Syam Charan, Gosain, biog. 258
Shiv Ram, Gosa’in. See Seo Ram,           Syam Das, Gosa’in, biog. 258-59
   Gosain                                 Syam Krishan, biog. 259
Shrivatsa Goswami, 1
Shyam Kishan, receives land-grant         tankas, copper coins, 138
   from Jahangir, 92, 101                 Tarauli, tappa in Pargana Sahar, 101,
Sital or Shital s/o Nagur, muqaddam          201, 238
   or panch, ‘inhabitant’, Dosaich,       Tek Chand ‘Bahar’, lexicographer, 75
    133, 144, 145                         Thakur Bhoj Sundar (?), temple,
Sitaldas, man of some status,                Basai Buzurg, Jahangir grant to,
   (= Mehta Sitaldas?), buys house at        92, 100
286                                 Index

Thakur Dwara, temple, Vrindavan,        Vallabhacharya, founder of Govardhan
   Jahangir grant to, 92, 100              (‘Gordhan’) temple, 70
Thana Farida, d/utwr-circle, 17, 18;    Vishnu Vichitr, Gosa’in, biog. 259
   crop rates for, 46                   Vithal Rai, Bithalrai, Vallabhi high
thok, a group of families descended        priest, 24, 63, 64, 97
   from common ancestor, 175            Vrindavan, vill./town, 1, 2, 4, 5, 13,
Tilpat, pargana (pargana headquarters      19,21,25-29, 30 &n., 31, 32, 34,
   later shifted to Faridabad), 42;        36, 38, 39, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73-74,
   zamindars & retainers in, 22;           93, 95, 105, 114, 116, 118, 130,
   statistics for, 44-45;                  153, 194,211,218, 220,228,231,
Toda Bhiwan (Bhim), 30                     236, 237, 239, 256, 258; spellings
Todal Mai, Raja, Akbar’s minister,         of name, 7-8; temples of, 85, 95,
   58-59, 71, 223; grant to Madan          112 &.      Kishan Priyas house
   Mohan temple, 60, 75, 77, 78, 92,       in, raided, 121-26; land transfers
   100, 169, 170, 178 & n., 179, 180,      in, 132-37, 142-47; price of land
    183, 184-85, 209, 256                  in, 137; revenue assessed on, 156;
Todar Mai’s garden, Rajpur, 182, 183       eviction of peasants from huts in,
transliteration, mode adopted in this      157; ‘mukadams’ of, 252.
   book, 7-8                            Vrindavan Research Institute,
Tubi Singh, peasant, vill Rajpur, 19       Vrindavan, 1, 2      57
Tulsi/Tursi, sons of, Gauruas,
   peasants, Vrindavan, 152             Wright, J.C., 2, 129 & n., 175 & n.

Udai Chand, official under Todal Mai,
                                        Yamuna, change of course of, 143
   178
Udai Ram Das, debtor, 31 & n.
Udai Singh, jagirdar, Sambhar salt      zamindars, jimidars, 21, 114, 133;
   beds, 251                                castes of, in Braj Bhum, 21-22,
Udambar, sarkar, Bengal, 100, 257           50-52; class of, 151; term used for
Ugrasen, qdnungo (kdnaugo), vill.           landholding peasants, Vrindavan,
   Dosaich, 146                             156, 157, & at Arith, 173, 174
Upendar Misr, advisor to Abu’l Fazl
   on temples, 64, 65, 80               Ziya’ullah Khan, Diwvt, siiba Agra,
usury, 30-32                               197, 206, 229, 235
Irfan Habib (b. 1931). Educated till M.A. at
Aligarh, with D.Phil. from Oxford 1958, he
taught from 1953 to 1994 at Aligarh where he is
now Professor Emeritus. His works include The
Agrarian System of Mugful India, 1656—1707 (1963,
revd. edn.,4999 & 201.4); An Atlas of the Mughal
Umpire (1983); Essays in Indian History, Towards a
Marxist Perception (1995); Medieval India: the Study
of a Civilisation (2008); Economic History of Medieval
India, 1200E-1500 (2011); and Atlas of Ancient
Indian History (with Paiz Habib) (2012). He has
published twelve monographs in the People’s
History of India series, two of these jointly
authored. He has co-editcd Cambridge Economic
History of India, Vol. I (1982); UNESCO’s
History of Humanity, Vol. IV (1999) and Vol. V
(2000); and UNESCO’s History of Central Asia,
Vol. V (2003).

Tarapada Mukherjee (1928-90). Educated,
Calcutta and Visva-Bharati, he obtained his
doctoral degree (1959) from the School of
Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), London,
with a thesis on Brajbuli poetry. Having already
published an anthology of Bengali poetry (1954),
he undertook (with T.W. Clerk) a translation of
the novel Pathar Panchali (1969). In 1971, came
his study of Krishna Kirtan, and later, with the
collaboration of Sukumar Sen, a critical edition
of Krishnadas Kaviraj’s Chaitanyacharitamrita
(1988). In the meantime he organized the
project of tracking down and photographing
all old documents in possession of temples and
individuals in the Braj region. Based on this
material, he published four articles (one jointly
withj.C. Wright and the rest with Irfan Habib).




Jacket‘illustration: Govind-dev Temple, Vrindavan:
Drawing pub. James Fergusson, 1886
Jacket design: pinaki De
www.primusbooks.com
